Title: Digital Identity for Agentic Systems: Toward a Portable Authorization Standard for Autonomous Agents

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.11487v1

Published Time: Wed, 13 May 2026 00:36:22 GMT

Number of Pages: 46

Markdown Content:
# Digital Identity for Agentic Systems: Toward a Portable Authorization Standard for Autonomous Agents 

# Partha Madhira 

# Abstract 

Enterprise AI is shifting from copilots to autonomous agents capable of executing workflows, negotiating outcomes, and making decisions with limited human oversight. While many deployments remain internal today, increasing pressure exists to extend these systems across organizational boundaries, for example, through emerging initiatives such as MIT’s Project NANDA, which explore the foundations of an “Internet of Agents” [20]. This shift introduces new trust challenges: not only must an agent be identifiable, but its authority must also be explicit, constrained, auditable, and revocable. This paper analyzes two representative enterprise use cases: insurance claims processing and supply chain integrity in defense and aerospace. It uses them to surface the identity and trust requirements that emerge when autonomous agents operate across organizational boundaries. It first examines structural gaps in ex-isting identity models through these scenarios, and then proposes a portable authorization standard for au-tonomous agents: a common authorization semantic model with typed constraint algebra, decision-consistent evaluation semantics, delegation attenuation rules, governed semantic resolution, and pre-flight discovery. It also outlines a layered standardization path that separates a normative core from profile bindings, governed vocabularies, and optional advanced governance profiles for stateful enforcement. 

# 1. Introduction 

Artificial intelligence systems are undergoing a structural transition from tools that assist human users to autonomous agents capable of initiating and executing impactful actions. In enterprise environments, this evolution is particularly significant. Agents are no longer confined to generating recommendations or summarizing information; they are increasingly entrusted with tasks such as approving transactions, coordinating critical workflows, and interacting with internal and external systems on behalf of organizations. This shift introduces a trust problem regardless of whether agents are coordinating workflows internally within an enterprise or submitting actions to third-party vendors, suppliers, service providers, or clients. Even within a single organization, identity, access control, and audit responsibilities are often distributed across business units, control functions, and operational systems. As a result, accountability is not always straightforward to establish when autonomous agents begin to act across these internal lines of control. An example workflow within an enterprise is an IT operations agent autonomously placing an order with an external vendor without involving procurement. While the action may technically originate from within the enterprise, it bypasses established financial and procedural control points. The immediate concern is not merely whether the agent was authenticated, but whether the agent had bypassed the established process, potentially exposing the enterprise to audit failure, non-compliance, or financial loss. This requires answering questions through conscious, well-considered design about authorization, policy compliance, and auditability. All of these concerns already exist within an enterprise even before integrations with external parties come into play. These gaps may sometimes remain contained, tolerated, or compensated for within enterprise boundaries. They become significantly more pronounced and consequential, however, when agent interactions extend across organizational boundaries to partners, suppliers, service providers, customers, and regulators. In 1

> arXiv:2605.11487v1 [cs.CR] 12 May 2026

such settings, each party operates under its own policies, contractual obligations, and accountability regimes. Actions may carry legal, financial, or regulatory consequences, and failures can propagate across ecosystems rather than remaining confined to a single control environment. Seen in this light, the central challenge is not defined by where an agent acts, but by how its authority is established, interpreted, and governed as it acts. Similar questions arise regardless of whether the action is internal or cross-boundary: what authority does the agent hold, who granted it, under what conditions may it act, and how can its actions be attributed and audited over time? Existing identity and access management models were developed primarily to authenticate principals and authorize access to resources, whether for human users or machine workloads. They remain effective for many enterprise and cross-organizational integrations. However, they provide limited standardized sup-port for expressing portable, issuer-authored authorization constraints that can be evaluated consistently as autonomous actions unfold over time under changing conditions. The discussion that follows examines how digital identity must evolve as AI systems shift from read-only analysis to autonomous action-taking. It analyzes representative enterprise scenarios to surface the identity and trust requirements that emerge when autonomous agents operate across trust boundaries. In doing so, it explores how identity must move beyond point-in-time authentication toward supporting the evaluation and enforcement of delegated authority as agent actions unfold. 

# 2. Background and Structural Limitations 

Traditional identity and access management systems are built on a relatively simple model: a subject is authenticated, and based on that authentication, access to resources is granted or denied. Mechanisms such as OAuth tokens, API keys, and role-based access control have proven effective in environments where interactions are short-lived, well-defined, and largely synchronous. However, these models assume that access decisions can be made at the moment a request is initiated. They do not account for workflows that unfold over time, nor do they capture the intent or context behind a sequence of actions. In agentic systems, this limitation becomes critical. An agent may initiate a process, make intermediate decisions, interact with multiple parties, and eventually drive an outcome, all without direct human intervention at each step. Simple bearer-token-based authorization exemplifies this gap. A bearer token can confirm that a system is permitted to access a resource, but it provides limited information about whether a specific action is appro-priate within a given business context. More expressive authorization frameworks can carry richer claims, delegated context, or structured authorization details, but they still do not generally define a portable eval-uation model for issuer-authored constraints such as bounded settlement authority, restrictions limiting an agent to approved recipients or data domains, validity only within a defined temporal window, or cumulative exposure limits, for example, authority to place individual orders up to USD 2000, but no more than USD 50,000 in aggregate within a week. As a result, systems often compensate through centralized orchestration, bilateral integration logic, or post hoc auditing. These workarounds become increasingly fragile as autonomy and distribution increase. When agents operate across organizational boundaries, each interaction carries potential legal, financial, or regulatory implications. The distinction between authentication and authorization becomes more pronounced: it is no longer sufficient to know who is acting; it is necessary to determine whether the action itself is justified, compliant, and within the bounds of delegated authority. Existing models therefore exhibit a structural limitation. They are designed to answer whether access should be granted at a point in time, but they are not designed to govern how authority is exercised across a sequence of decisions. In agentic systems, however, risk does not arise solely at the initiation of an interaction, but throughout the chain of actions that follow. This mismatch introduces a fundamental challenge. Identity must evolve from a mechanism that gates access to one that supports the evaluation and enforcement of authority as actions unfold over time. It must be 2capable of expressing not only who an agent is, but also what it is allowed to do, under what constraints, and with what accountability. 

# 3. Analytical Framework 

The analysis centers on concrete enterprise scenarios in which autonomous agents operate across organiza-tional boundaries within and across enterprises. These scenarios provide a practical basis for identifying where existing identity models remain sufficient, where they begin to fail, and what additional requirements emerge when agents are allowed to act rather than merely assist. Each use case is examined along three dimensions. First, the relevant actors and trust boundaries are identified, with particular attention to where authority, data, and responsibility cross organizational lines. Second, the interactions between agents are examined in detail, focusing on the sequence of actions, decision points, and dependencies that characterize the workflow. Third, the identity and authorization requirements that emerge from these interactions are articulated, with an emphasis on what must be verifiable, enforceable, and auditable. These three dimensions are used because they expose different layers of the same problem. Actors and trust boundaries reveal where accountability becomes fragmented. Agent interactions reveal how risk materializes through the unfolding chain of actions rather than at a single moment of access. Identity and authorization requirements reveal what existing systems must be able to represent, evaluate, and enforce if those interac-tions are to remain trustworthy. Taken together, these dimensions make it possible to move from isolated examples to a more general understanding of the structural gaps introduced by action-taking agents. The use cases presented here insurance claims processing and supply chain integrity in defense and aerospace, are not drawn from any single source. They are enterprise-oriented analytical scenarios informed by years of experience in production-grade implementation. They are not intended as an exhaustive catalogue of agentic systems. Several candidate scenarios were considered, and these were selected because, taken together, they surface the principal failure modes discussed in this paper across both operational decision-making and multi-party coordination settings. They are used as representative settings in which authority, verification, policy compliance, and auditability are all stressed in ways that make underlying identity limitations easier to observe. 

# 4. Use Case 1: Agentic Insurance Claims Processing 

Insurance claims processing provides a representative example of how autonomous agents may operate across organizational boundaries. The process involves multiple independent parties, including policyholders, in-surers, adjusters, service providers, and reinsurers, each operating under distinct contractual and regulatory obligations. In an agentic model, each of these parties may be represented by software agents capable of performing tasks such as collecting evidence, validating coverage, coordinating service providers, and executing payments. A typical workflow begins when a policyholder, or an agent acting on their behalf, submits a claim. The insurer’s agent verifies policy details, evaluates submitted evidence, and determines the appropriate processing path. As the workflow progresses, interactions extend beyond the insurer’s internal systems. An adjuster agent may request repair estimates from external service-provider agents, which must in turn demonstrate their legitimacy and compliance with required standards. A negotiator agent may also interact with the policy-holder to negotiate the adjustment amount, as commonly occurs in claims handling. Such an agent would require clearly bounded authorization, including guidance on the range within which it may negotiate and when it must escalate to the adjuster or another authority. In more complex cases, reinsurer agents may be involved to assess exposure and confirm coverage thresholds. Finally, a payment agent may execute disbursement once all conditions are satisfied. These interactions are not merely data exchanges; they are decision-bearing steps that carry financial and legal implications. Each participating agent must therefore be able to establish not only its identity, but also the authority under which it operates. 3From this scenario, several identity and trust requirements emerge. Agents must possess identities that are verifiable across organizational boundaries, enabling counterparties to establish trust without relying solely on bilateral integrations. Authority must be explicitly delegated, with clear constraints on scope, duration, and permissible actions. Policies governing data sharing, regulatory compliance, and decision thresholds must be enforceable as part of the interaction, rather than being applied only at system boundaries. Additionally, the entire workflow must be auditable. Autonomous decisions must be traceable to specific agents, the authority under which they acted, and the evidence they considered. Finally, delegation must be revocable, allowing organizations to withdraw authority in response to errors, misconfigurations, or security incidents without disrupting the broader system. This may become necessary, for example, when an agent repeatedly attempts to query a database beyond its expected scope or tries to copy more information than is required for the task at hand, indicating either malfunction, overreach, or compromise. Current approaches struggle to meet these requirements. Centralized workflow engines and bearer-token authorization models are effective for tightly coupled systems but provide limited support for expressing delegated authority or enforcing constraints across distributed, asynchronous interactions. As a result, they rely heavily on predefined integrations and retrospective auditing, which only addresses the aftermath of an action rather than giving humans a meaningful opportunity to prevent it from occurring in the first place, and therefore becomes insufficient as autonomy increases. 

Figure 1: Agent Insurance Claims Processing use case: representative cross-organizational workflow showing how agents verify coverage, coordinate external parties, negotiate settlements, involve reinsurers when needed, and execute payment. 

# 5. Use Case 2: Agentic Supply Chain Integrity in Defense and Aerospace 

A second representative scenario arises in high-assurance supply chains such as those found in defense and aerospace manufacturing. In these environments, components pass through multiple tiers of suppliers before they are assembled into systems whose failure may carry severe operational, financial, or safety consequences. A defect in a single part may trigger costly investigations, production delays, certification issues, or down-stream failures. In such settings, enterprises are increasingly interested in digital continuity across the lifecycle of a part. The component or product identifier functions here as the stable business reference for a long-running cross-boundary workflow, while the agent carries the authorization needed to request, relay, or present evidence associated with that reference. An autonomous agent may follow a component as it moves from one supplier to another, collecting attestations about its provenance, material properties, testing history, and compliance 4with required specifications. As the part moves from a lower-tier manufacturer to an assembler, the agent must preserve a chain of evidence that can later be inspected by auditors, regulators, or prime contractors. These interactions introduce a distinct trust challenge. Each supplier may need to prove that its contribution satisfies contractual or technical requirements without disclosing proprietary manufacturing processes, sen-sitive operational details, or the identities of its own sub-suppliers. At the same time, downstream parties must be able to determine whether the presenting agent is authorized to carry, relay, or request specific attestations, and whether those attestations can be relied upon in later certification or audit processes. The identity requirements that emerge from this use case are substantial. Agents must be identifiable across organizational boundaries and must be able to demonstrate the authority under which they are requesting, carrying, or presenting lifecycle evidence. Authorization must be specific enough to govern what types of attestations an agent may access or transmit, under what conditions, and to which parties. Auditability is also essential, since failures often require reconstruction of the chain of responsibility across many organizations. Current approaches rely heavily on manual attestations, fragmented documentation, and delayed reconcilia-tion of records. These mechanisms are slow, brittle, and poorly suited to machine-speed coordination across large supplier networks. They also make it difficult to determine, in real time, whether an agent is acting within its permitted scope or whether a presented chain of evidence remains trustworthy as it moves across organizational boundaries. 

Figure 2: Agentic Supply Chain Integrity in Defense and Aerospace use case: a component moves across supplier tiers while an autonomous agent preserves provenance, test, and compliance evidence for downstream certification, audit, and investigation. 

# 6. Cross-Case Synthesis 

The two use cases examined in this paper: agentic insurance claims processing and agentic supply chain integrity in defense and aerospace arise in different industries, operate under different accountability regimes, and involve different constellations of actors. Yet they surface a remarkably consistent set of identity and trust requirements. This section synthesizes those requirements and identifies the architectural gap that neither existing identity standards nor emerging agent communication protocols currently address. 

6.1 Five Recurring Requirements 

Five identity-related capabilities recur across both use cases. 51. Delegated authority for non-human actors. In both domains, software agents must act with explicit, bounded authority on behalf of organizations or individuals. An insurer’s negotiator agent must carry proof that it is authorized to settle within a defined range and under clearly bounded conditions. A supply-chain agent must carry proof that it is authorized to request, relay, or present specific attestations as a component moves across supplier tiers. In each case, authority must be scoped by purpose, bounded by constraints, and revocable without disrupting the broader system. 2. Verifiable agent identity across organizational boundaries. Internal agent deployments can often rely on platform-level mechanisms such as service accounts or workload identity. Across orga-nizational boundaries, however, the requirement is stronger: counterparties must be able to verify not only that the presenting agent is authentic, but also that it is acting under legitimate, bounded authority. Federated workload identity can help establish strong presenter authentication across trust domains, but it does not by itself convey portable, delegated business authorization with bounded con-straints, audit semantics, and revocation behavior that independent parties can interpret consistently. Thus, when an insurer’s adjuster agent requests evidence from an external service-provider agent, or when a prime contractor receives lifecycle evidence from a lower-tier supplier’s agent, each party must be able to determine that the other is both genuine and appropriately authorized, rather than an impersonator or a compromised system. 3. Policy-bound authorization rather than broad, bearer-based access. Bearer tokens are the dominant authorization artifact in modern API architectures. They grant access but carry little infor-mation about what the holder is specifically permitted to do, under what constraints, or for how long. Both use cases require authorization that reflects business and regulatory rules: monetary ceilings, ne-gotiation ranges, temporal windows, resource restrictions, disclosure boundaries, recipient limitations, and escalation thresholds. These rules must travel with the agent, not reside solely in the receiver’s configuration. 4. End-to-end auditability of autonomous decisions. When an agent negotiates a settlement, re-quests or relays a material certificate, appends an attestation to a chain of evidence, or approves a downstream action, the interaction must be traceable. Auditors, regulators, certification bodies, and dispute-resolution processes require the ability to reconstruct what happened, who authorized it, under what constraints, and why the system produced the outcome it did. This requirement is not merely operational; in regulated and high-assurance industries, it is often a legal or certification obligation. 5. Revocation and accountability. If an agent is compromised, misconfigured, or exceeds its mandate, its authority must be withdrawn promptly. When errors occur, responsibility must be attributable to the organization that empowered the agent. Revocation must propagate through delegation chains: revoking a parent credential must invalidate downstream delegations derived from it. 

6.2 Different Facets of the Same Problem 

While both use cases converge on the same five requirements, they stress different facets of the underlying model. Insurance claims processing exercises runtime constraint evaluation and delegation attenuation most heavily. The workflow involves a chain of specialist agents such as claims intake, fraud analysis, valuation, negotiation, and payment, each operating under progressively narrower authority. A claims authority dele-gates to an orchestrator, which delegates to a specialist, which may delegate to a sub-specialist. At each hop, the scope must narrow or hold constant; it must never widen. The receiving party evaluates the embedded constraints against the live request context in near-real time: is the claim amount within the authorized ceiling, is the negotiation range still in bounds, is the claim type permitted, is the request within the allowed processing window? The tempo is fast: minutes to hours, and the evaluation is point-in-time. The defense and aerospace supply-chain use case exercises chain-of-evidence integrity and scoped at-testation flow . The critical challenge is not only whether a single request falls within an operational ceiling, but whether the agent’s authority to request, carry, or present specific categories of evidence can be verified, whether the provenance of contributed attestations remains intact, and whether the entire interaction can be 6reconstructed for regulatory, contractual, or forensic review. The tempo is slower: hours to days or longer, and the evidentiary chain is longer and must withstand scrutiny months or years later. This contrast is instructive. A model that handles only runtime constraint evaluation would serve insurance but leave supply-chain integrity underserved. A model that handles only chain-of-evidence integrity would serve supply chains but miss the real-time enforcement requirements of claims processing. The architectural challenge is to define a common authorization semantic model that accommodates both: structured, machine-evaluable constraints for real-time enforcement, combined with cryptographic provenance and delegation chain integrity for post-hoc audit. 

6.3 The Gap 

Existing standards and emerging protocols address fragments of this problem, but the challenge is one of composition and interoperation across trust boundaries, not simply the absence of individual building blocks. 

W3C Verifiable Credentials [7] define a data model for tamper-evident, cryptographically verifiable claims. They establish who issued a credential, who it is about, and when it expires. They do not define how to embed machine-evaluable authorization constraints within a credential, how those constraints should be evaluated at runtime, or how delegation should attenuate authority across a chain. 

OAuth 2.0 and its extensions [2]-[5] provide a mature framework for delegated access to resources across both user-mediated and machine-to-machine interactions. In practice, however, OAuth leaves substantial discretion to receiving systems in how authorization semantics are modeled and enforced. Conventional scopes are often coarse-grained, and even more expressive mechanisms such as structured authorization details improve request specificity more than cross-receiver semantic portability. As a result, two conformant receivers may still interpret the same authorization artifact differently at the level of business policy. OAuth is therefore highly effective for resource access delegation, but it does not by itself define a portable evaluation model that independent receivers must apply deterministically to issuer-authored constraints. 

MCP-related identity and agent credential efforts [17], including those arising around agent commu-nication frameworks, improve the representation of agent identity, roles, and delegated assertions. However, they do not yet establish a common evaluation model for issuer-authored authorization constraints, merge behavior, and attenuation semantics that independent receivers can be expected to interpret consistently. As a result, interoperability at the level of authentication or credential exchange does not by itself guarantee interoperable authorization outcomes. 

Capability-based models such as UCAN [11], Biscuit [12], and zCAP-LD [23], [24] provide strong support for delegation, attenuation, and cryptographic chaining. zCAP-LD is especially notable for making the separation between a capability envelope and pluggable caveats explicit. However, zCAP-LD remains an incubating W3C CCG work item and is therefore still subject to change. If and when it matures into a stable standard, this model aspires to leverage its delegation and attenuation mechanics cleanly. The center of gravity of these standards, however, is capability transfer rather than a standardized constraint algebra for enterprise-style authorization conditions such as monetary bounds, temporal windows, recipient restrictions, or cumulative exposure controls. They therefore address an important part of the problem, but not the full portable evaluation model proposed here. 

Policy engines such as OPA/Rego [14], Cedar [15], and Zanzibar [16] demonstrate that fine-grained au-thorization can be enforced effectively at runtime. Their primary design center, however, is receiver-defined policy evaluation. They do not by themselves standardize a portable, issuer-authored authorization payload with shared semantics across independent receivers, which is the gap addressed here. 

OpenID AuthZEN [21] is directly relevant because it standardizes an authorization API between Policy Enforcement Points and Policy Decision Points. It improves interoperability for how authorization decisions are requested and returned, including access evaluation, batched evaluation, search, and PDP metadata discovery. The model proposed here addresses a different layer: the portable, issuer-authored authorization payload that an agent presents across trust boundaries, together with typed constraints, semantic resolution, delegation attenuation, and deterministic receiver-side evaluation semantics. In practice, the two approaches 7are complementary: a receiver could expose or consume AuthZEN-style PDP interfaces while evaluating the portable authorization credential defined in this paper. The gap, stated precisely, is the absence of a widely adopted, container-agnostic authorization model that combines issuer-authored, machine-evaluable constraints with defined evaluation semantics, delegation at-tenuation, most-restrictive-wins composition, and cryptographically anchored auditability, while enabling independent receivers to reach consistent decisions from the same signed authorization and request context. 

Figure 3: The proposed contribution is not the credentials, delegation, policy engines, or audit in isolation; it is the integration of these elements into a portable authorization model with shared evaluation semantics across independent receivers. 

# 7. A Common Authorization Semantic Model for Autonomous Agents 

This section presents the core technical contribution of the paper: a formal authorization semantic model for autonomous agents operating across organizational boundaries. The model is intentionally separated from any specific credential format or policy engine. It defines what the authorization payload must contain, how constraints are structured and evaluated, how delegation attenuates authority, and how the processing pipeline produces a deterministic allow-or-deny decision for any given input. 

7.1 Architectural Separation: Container, Payload, Engine 

The first design principle is a strict three-layer separation. 

Layer 1 — Credential Container. The cryptographic envelope that carries the authorization payload, binds it to an issuer identity, and provides tamper evidence. This may be a W3C Verifiable Credential [7], a standard JWT [1] with structured claims, or another signed container. The container provides integrity and authenticity. It does not define what the authorization means. 

Layer 2 — Authorization Payload. The structured, machine-evaluable content that defines what an agent is authorized to do and under what conditions. This is the normative core of the model. It is encoding-independent: the same semantic content can be serialized into a VC field, a JWT claim set, or another supported representation. For consistency, this paper refers to the signed, portable unit that carries this payload as an authorization credential . The term artifact is reserved for related outputs such as audit records, discovery manifests, and state vouchers. What matters is not the serialization but the presence of a defined set of mandatory components and typed constraints. 

Layer 3 — Enforcement Engine. The runtime system that verifies the credential container, extracts the authorization payload, evaluates the constraints against the actual request context, merges with local 8policy, and produces a decision. This may be OPA, Cedar, Zanzibar, a purpose-built evaluator, or another runtime that implements the processing pipeline defined below. The engine is interchangeable; the evaluation semantics are not. 

Note on Terminology: This model uses the terms Container, Payload, and Engine to define a functional architecture for portable authorization. While these concepts overlap with existing frameworks (like XACML, OAuth, or ToIP), they are defined here as distinct, independent logical layers to ensure that the authorization payload remains the stable, deterministic contract regardless of the underlying trust infrastructure or runtime stack. This separation is analogous to the relationship between a declarative specification and the runtime that enforces it. Two different enforcement engines that both correctly implement the evaluation rules defined here should produce the same authorization decision from the same credential and request context. The practical consequence is that the standard operates at the payload layer. It defines the grammar, that is, the constraint types, the evaluation algebra, the attenuation rules, and the processing pipeline. It does not mandate a specific container or engine. This three-layer model is a problem-specific decomposition of portable agent authorization, not a restatement of a broader trust-stack taxonomy. Governance artifacts such as manifests, trust registries, and mapping profiles remain important, but in this paper they function as external inputs and constraints on authorization processing rather than as a separate runtime layer in the figure. Layer 3 is a logical evaluation function, not a claim about deployment topology. A conformant implementation may realize it through a unified evaluator, a PEP/PDP split, or another internal architecture, provided the verification and decision semantics defined here are preserved. Pure reference tokens, API keys, and identity-only credentials that cannot support carrying cryptographically bound authorization credentials naturally remain out of scope. For clarity, this paper uses the following terms consistently. The authorization payload is the machine-evaluable semantic content. The authorization credential is the signed portable unit formed when that payload is bound into a credential container. The issuer is the authority that grants that credential. The 

subject agent is the agent to whom the credential applies. The presenting agent , or presenter , is the runtime actor that presents the credential; subject binding requires the presenting agent to match the subject agent. The term artifact is reserved for related outputs such as audit records, discovery manifests, and state vouchers. Where the term enforcer appears in advanced stateful profiles, it refers to a receiver-side enforcement engine instance. 9Figure 4: Three-layer authorization architecture separating the credential container, authorization payload, and enforcement engine. 

7.2 Authorization Payload: Four Mandatory Components 

Every agent authorization credential, regardless of container format, must carry four components. 

Component 1 — Agent Identity. The identifier of the agent to whom this authorization applies. This binds the credential to a specific agent; no other agent can legitimately present it. 

Component 2 — Issuer Identity. The identifier of the entity that granted this authorization. This is the delegator, which may be a human, an enterprise IAM system, or another authorized agent acting within its own delegated authority. The issuer identity must be cryptographically verifiable through the container’s signature. 

Component 3 — Declared Permissions. What the agent is allowed to do. These are expressed as explicit action identifiers. If the agent requests an action not covered by its declared permissions, the request is denied regardless of whether the constraints would otherwise pass. 

Component 4 — Policy Constraints. The machine-evaluable conditions under which the declared permissions apply. These are the enforceable rules embedded in the credential: monetary ceilings, temporal windows, resource patterns, categorical restrictions, recipient limitations, or other conditions that can be evaluated at runtime against the actual request context. Together, these four components constitute the portable authorization policy. The policy is signed as a unit by the issuing authority. It cannot be modified after issuance without invalidating the signature. It can only be narrowed through delegation, never widened. 10 7.3 Typed Constraint Algebra 

The model defines four core constraint types. Each type has defined properties, evaluation rules, and delegation attenuation rules. The choice of four types, rather than an unconstrained expression language, is deliberate and reflects a design tradeoff between expressiveness and determinism. Taken together, these four types provide a minimum deterministic basis for portable authorization across heterogeneous receivers: scalar bounds, time validity, set membership, and namespace scoping. More specialized behavior may be introduced through governed profiles or advanced extensions, but the normative core remains intentionally compact. 

7.3.1 NumericLimitConstraint A numeric limit constraint expresses bounded quantitative authority. It contains a field name, an operator such as eq , lt , lte , gt , or gte , and a numeric value. It may optionally include a unit or currency where relevant. 

Evaluation. Extract the named field from the request context and apply the operator against the declared value. If the comparison is true, the constraint passes. If the field is absent or the value is not numeric, the constraint fails. A bounded range may be expressed by composing two numeric constraints over the same field; for example, a floor expressed with gte and a ceiling expressed with lte thereby supporting negotiation ranges without introducing a separate range primitive into the core algebra. 

Example. A negotiator agent may carry  

> NumericLimitConstraint( field=settlementAmount, operator=lte, value=5000, currency=USD)

.

Attenuation rule. A delegate’s numeric limit must be equal or more restrictive than the parent’s. For ceiling operators such as lte , the delegate’s value must be less than or equal to the parent’s. A delegate cannot raise a ceiling. 

7.3.2 TemporalWindowConstraint A temporal window constraint expresses when a permission is valid. It includes a field, a valid-from time, a valid-until time, a timezone, and optionally a set of allowed days. 

Evaluation. Convert the request timestamp to the specified timezone and confirm that it falls within the allowed interval. If the field is absent, the constraint fails. 

Example. A claims-handling credential may carry  

> TemporalWindowConstraint( field=requestTime, valid_from=2026-04-01T00:00:00Z, valid_until=2026-04-30T23:59:59Z, time-zone=UTC)

.

Attenuation rule. A delegate’s time window must be a subset of the parent’s. It may narrow the valid window but not broaden it. 

7.3.3 EnumeratedListConstraint An enumerated list constraint expresses bounded categories or recip-ient sets. It references a field and defines either an allowed set, a denied set, or both. 

Evaluation. If an allowed set is present, the request value must be a member. If a denied set is present, the value must not be a member. If both apply, deny takes precedence. Missing fields fail closed. 

Example. A payment credential may carry EnumeratedListConstraint(field=recipientId, allowed=[vendorA, vendorB, vendorC]) .

Attenuation rule. A delegate’s allowed set must be a subset of the parent’s. A delegate’s denied set may be equal or broader. 

7.3.4 StringPatternConstraint A string pattern constraint expresses bounded namespaces or resource scopes. It references a field, a pattern, and a match type such as exact , prefix , suffix , or a restricted glob. 11 Evaluation. Extract the field and apply the declared matching rule. The exact match type requires the request value to match the pattern literally. The prefix match type requires the request value to begin with the declared string. The suffix match type requires the request value to end with the declared string. A restricted glob is an anchored wildcard pattern consisting only of literal characters and the * wildcard, where * matches zero or more characters. It excludes regular-expression features such as character classes, alternation, grouping, backreferences, and lookaround. Regular expressions are excluded from the core model to avoid dialect fragmentation and security risks such as catastrophic backtracking. 

Example. 

> StringPatternConstraint( field=resourceId, match=exact, pattern=claims/CLM-2026-00412)

matches only that single resource. 

> StringPatternConstraint( field=resourceId, match=prefix, pattern=claims/)

matches any resource under the claims/ namespace. 

> StringPatternConstraint( field=documentName, match=suffix, pattern=.pdf)

matches PDF artifacts. 

> StringPatternConstraint( field=resourceId, match=restricted_glob, pattern=claims/*/attachments/*)

matches only attachment resources under the claims hierarchy. 

Attenuation rule. A delegate’s pattern must match a subset of the strings matched by the parent’s pattern. A delegate cannot broaden the matched namespace. 

7.3.5 Composite Constraint Examples The four core constraint types are intentionally simple, but they are meant to be composed. In practice, an authorization credential will often carry several constraints that are evaluated together under the conjunctive fail-closed model described in Section 7.4. 

Example 1: insurance claims negotiator. A claims negotiator agent may be authorized to settle only certain claim types, within a bounded negotiation range, during business-valid time windows, and only for resources under the approved claims namespace. 

permission: claim.settle constraints: - NumericLimitConstraint( field=settlementAmount, operator=gte, value=2500, currency=USD )// Establishes the lower bound of the authorized negotiation range. - NumericLimitConstraint( field=settlementAmount, operator=lte, value=5000, currency=USD )// Establishes the upper bound; the agent cannot settle above USD 5,000. 

12 - TemporalWindowConstraint( field=requestTime, valid_from=2026-04-01T00:00:00Z, valid_until=2026-04-30T23:59:59Z, timezone=America/New_York, allowed_days=[Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday] )// Limits settlement authority to the authorized calendar window and weekdays. - EnumeratedListConstraint( field=claimType, allowed=[auto_collision, property_damage] )// Restricts the agent to claim categories covered by the delegation. - StringPatternConstraint( field=claimId, match=prefix, pattern=claims/auto/ )// Restricts the resource namespace to auto-claim records. 

Example 2: supply-chain evidence agent. A supply-chain agent may be authorized to present only approved evidence types, to approved recipient roles, for components in a specific namespace, and with a bounded disclosure volume. 

permission: evidence.present constraints: - EnumeratedListConstraint( field=evidenceType, allowed=[origin_attestation, test_certificate, material_compliance] )// Allows only evidence categories that are approved for disclosure. - EnumeratedListConstraint( field=recipientRole, allowed=[prime_contractor, certified_auditor, regulator] )// Limits disclosure to recipient roles that are permitted to receive evidence. - StringPatternConstraint( field=componentId, match=restricted_glob, pattern=aerospace/components/*/lot/* )// Restricts evidence presentation to components under a governed namespace. - TemporalWindowConstraint( field=requestTime, valid_from=2026-01-01T00:00:00Z, valid_until=2026-12-31T23:59:59Z, timezone=UTC )// Defines the period during which the evidence-presenting authority is valid. 

13 - NumericLimitConstraint( field=maxRecordsDisclosed, operator=lte, value=100 )// Prevents excessive disclosure in a single interaction. 

7.3.6 Extensibility The four core types are not a closed set. The model allows extension types, but each extension must declare three things: its evaluation semantics, its attenuation semantics, and its failure behavior. Any constraint type not recognized by the evaluator must be treated as failed. This preserves fail-closed behavior and prevents silent widening of authority. 

7.4 Evaluation Semantics 

The evaluation model is conjunctive, total, and fail-closed. 

Conjunctive logic. All constraints must pass for the request to be allowed. Constraints are cumulative restrictions, not alternative authorization paths. 

Fail-closed on unknown types. If the evaluator encounters a constraint type it does not recognize, the request is denied. 

Fail-closed on missing context. If a constraint references a field absent from the request context, the request is denied. These semantics ensure that the evaluation is total: every well-formed authorization credential against a request context produces a definite allow-or-deny outcome. Two conformant implementations, given the same signed authorization, request context, applicable profile and vocabulary versions, and canonical typing and mapping rules, should therefore produce the same authorization decision. It is this property of decision consistency under shared semantics that makes the model standardizable. 

7.5 Most-Restrictive-Wins and Local Policy 

The credential defines the authorization ceiling. The receiver’s local policy can lower that ceiling but never raise it. The effective authorization is the intersection of the credential’s constraints and the receiver’s local restrictions. This is a familiar security principle. A network-level permit does not override a more restrictive host-level policy. The same logic applies here: an authorization credential authorizing claims up to a certain threshold may still be narrowed further by the insurer’s internal control policy, or a supply-chain agent’s relay permission may be narrowed by a receiver’s own disclosure rules. The critical design constraint is that local policy should be expressible using the same typed constraint model as the credential. This keeps evaluation uniform and the resulting decision trace auditable. 

7.5.1 Multi-Principal Workflow Composition Some enterprise workflows require more than one inde-pendently authorized agent to contribute to a single outcome. A claims settlement, for example, may require a claims adjuster agent to authorize the settlement amount and a fraud detection agent to attest that fraud indicators are below the receiver’s threshold. These cases are not delegation chains: neither agent necessarily derives authority from the other, and their credentials may be issued by different authorities. The model treats this as multi-principal composition , not credential merging. Each credential is first evaluated independently against the presenting agent, issuer trust, audience, semantic profile, and request context. The workflow decision is then evaluated by the receiver’s workflow policy, which specifies which independently valid credentials, roles, attestations, or approvals are required for the outcome. A conformant 14 evaluator must not combine credentials from different issuers into a larger implied grant unless an applicable profile explicitly defines such a composition rule. Each authorization credential in the core model is itself conjunctive: all constraints carried by that cre-dential must pass for it to authorize the requested action. The normative core does not define a separate cross-credential algebra. When multiple credentials are presented, they are evaluated independently; any requirement that several credentials all be present and valid is defined by receiver workflow policy or by a governed profile, not by nested Boolean operators in the credential language itself. The safe default is therefore conjunctive composition at the workflow boundary: every required participant authorization must pass, and the final workflow action must remain within the intersection of all applicable constraints and local policy. If two credentials constrain the same semantic field, the most restrictive com-patible constraint applies. If the constraints are incompatible, ambiguous, or scoped to different meanings of the same field, the workflow must fail closed. Union semantics, such as “credential A allows amount up to USD 10,000 and credential B allows recipient X, therefore the combined system may perform both,” are not part of the core model unless explicitly authorized by a governed workflow profile. For example, a receiver may require one credential from a claims adjuster agent authorizing claim.settle 

up to USD 5,000 and a second credential from a fraud-screening agent attesting that the claim is eligible for automated settlement. Each credential is evaluated independently under the same fail-closed rules. The workflow policy then requires both to be valid before the settlement proceeds. The core model does not require a single composite credential to encode that relationship, nor does it require a general cross-credential AND ,

OR , or XOR algebra in the portable payload. 

7.6 Three-Tier Trust Gradient 

The authorization semantic model is independent of how trust is established between issuer and evaluator. In practice, however, enterprises operate at different levels of trust infrastructure maturity. The model accommodates three trust tiers. 

Tier 1 — Bilateral. Both parties already know each other. The issuer publishes a JWKS endpoint [6] or exchanges signing keys during partner onboarding. Authorization credentials may be standard JWTs with embedded structured constraints. 

Tier 2 — Federated. The parties share a trust anchor but may not have a direct bilateral relationship. X.509 certificates or comparable PKI mechanisms provide the trust chain. 

Tier 3 — Decentralized. No prior relationship is required. A verifiable credential carries its own trust chain, and the receiver resolves the issuer identity through decentralized trust resolution. The authorization semantics, the constraint types, evaluation algebra, attenuation rules, merge behavior, and audit requirements are identical across all three tiers. The trust tier is a deployment decision. The authorization model is the standard. The model therefore does not claim that one token class is universally best for every deployment. AJWT/JWS profile is often the most practical fit for current enterprise IAM and API ecosystems because it aligns with existing tooling and lower operational overhead. A VC profile is useful where portable issuer verifiability, decentralized trust resolution, or richer credential lifecycles are required across trust boundaries, but it can introduce additional privacy, status-management, and implementation complexity. The purpose of the standard is to keep the authorization meaning stable across those container choices rather than to force ecosystem convergence on a single token type. 

7.6.1 Trust Discovery and Governance Frameworks In a decentralized environment, resolving an issuer’s identity through a DID or comparable decentralized mechanism is not sufficient to establish business, regulatory, or domain-specific trust. Cryptographic verification establishes authenticity: it can show that the credential was issued by the controller of a given identifier and has not been tampered with. It does not, by itself, establish that the issuer is authorized to issue a particular class of authorization credential within 15 a given industry or governance regime. If the model is to support zero-trust, cross-boundary autonomy at scale, it therefore requires a standardized mechanism for trust discovery in addition to signature verification. 

7.6.1.1 Trust Registry Model In decentralized environments, the trust registry acts as a source of truth for vetted trust anchors, situating the interaction within a specific governance regime. Rather than serving as a static directory, the registry provides the governance metadata required to validate the agent’s operating environment. A conformant registry entry for agentic systems should provide at least three categories of governance information. First, it should establish issuer standing : whether the issuer is an active and recognized authority for the specific domain in question, such as insurance, aerospace, or another governed industry profile. Second, it should identify permitted state authorities : a vetted set of state-store providers, registries, or protocols that the issuer recognizes for cumulative governance. This prevents state spoofing by ensuring that an enforcer does not update counters or balances at an arbitrary location, but only at a state authority pre-approved by the delegating governance framework. Third, it should provide a vocabulary reference : governed references to the vertical industry profiles or semantic vocabularies the issuer uses for aliasing and profile interpretation, including profiles aligned with initiatives such as Project NANDA [20] and A2A Agent Cards [19] where applicable. These references are used for onboarding, validation, and profile synchronization rather than as a live runtime dependency for the evaluator. These registries should be queryable through standardized trust discovery frameworks or protocols, allowing evaluators to determine not only whether an issuer is cryptographically real, but whether it is in good standing for the relevant credential class, state authority model, and domain vocabulary. Nothing in this model requires authorization credentials or governance metadata to be published to a public Verifiable Data Registry. Depending on the deployment profile, the relevant trust registry or governance source may be public, consortium-scoped, bilateral, or enterprise-private, provided the evaluator can authen-ticate it and apply its results deterministically. 

7.6.1.2 Integration with Phase 1 Verification This discovery process belongs in Phase 1 of container verification. The resolveIssuer function should therefore be understood as performing not only identifier resolution, but also governance validation. The extended verification sequence is as follows. First, the evaluator extracts the issuer identifier from the presented artifact. Second, it resolves the issuer’s public key material through the applicable trust mechanism. Third, it queries the relevant trust registry or governance source to confirm that the issuer is an active and recognized authority for the requested credential type, domain profile, or vocabulary context. If the issuer cannot be found in a trusted registry, or if the governance query fails in a way that leaves issuer standing unresolved, the evaluator must fail closed and deny the request. This distinction is important because it separates two questions that are often collapsed into one: is this credential authentic? and is this issuer authorized to issue this kind of credential in this domain? In decentralized and multi-domain environments, both questions must be answered. 

7.6.1.3 Multi-Stakeholder Trust Anchors The model should also support transactions that require validation against multiple trust anchors. A credential used in a defense and aerospace workflow, for example, may need to be acceptable both to a technical standards body that governs material attestations and to a defense or export-control authority that governs regulatory standing. The evaluator’s local policy determines which trust anchors are required for a given transaction and whether all, or only a specified subset, must be satisfied before the artifact can be accepted. This capability becomes increasingly important in what some emerging initiatives describe as an Internet of Agents, where autonomous systems operate across overlapping technical, commercial, and regulatory trust 16 domains. A single cryptographically valid credential may therefore still be insufficient unless it can also be situated within the appropriate governance framework. 

7.7 Delegation and Attenuation 

Delegation allows an authorized entity to grant a subset of its own authority to another entity. The model enforces a monotonic attenuation invariant: at every delegation hop, the delegate’s authority must be equal to or narrower than the delegator’s. Permissions can only be narrowed. Constraints can only be tightened. Constraints cannot be dropped, since omission would widen effective authority. A delegated credential must therefore retain every parent constraint, either unchanged or in a strictly attenuated form according to the semantics of the relevant constraint type. Delegation should normally remain local to a shared trust and governance domain. This paper does not recommend cross-trust-boundary delegation as a default model for inter-organizational agent interaction. Across trust boundaries, the preferred pattern is independently authorized service invocation rather than propagation of derived authority. Although cross-boundary delegation is technically feasible, it creates substantially greater legal, regulatory, compliance, security, and audit complexity than independently au-thorized invocation. It complicates attribution of responsibility, weakens clarity about which policy regime governs a given action, increases the risk of unauthorized onward use or transfer of sensitive authority and data, and creates a form of fate sharing in which compromise of one trust domain may expose delegated authority originating elsewhere. The concern is not merely implementation difficulty. A cryptographic chain can show where authority originated, but it does not by itself determine which party controlled the runtime environment, internal policy logic, operational safeguards, or downstream handling that produced the action. Cross-boundary delegation therefore creates four recurring risks: an audit and accountability gap, regulatory and data-sovereignty friction, compromise-driven fate sharing, and semantic misalignment between the permission models of independent organizations. Service invocation avoids much of this complexity because each party remains independently authorized within its own policy domain. The appropriate response to dynamic agent spawning is not to rely on prompting alone, but on cryptographic identity enforcement. In this model, an external agent is recognized as a valid actor only if it can present its own cryptographically verifiable subject identity together with a valid signed authorization credential and proof of possession. A dynamically spawned sub-agent that lacks its own recognized identity, valid signature chain, and bound authorization is therefore not treated as an independently authorized principal by the receiver. From the perspective of the enforcement engine, it is merely an internal process of the originating system. Because the receiving system is required to verify subject binding, issuer trust, audience, and applicable policy constraints for the presenting actor, such a spawned agent will fail authorization at the boundary unless it is independently authorized under an explicitly accepted governance model. This boundary check is also essential for auditability and non-repudiation. Each externally acting agent must be attributable to a distinct cryptographically verifiable identity so that responsibility for a given action can be reconstructed and defended later. If dynamically spawned agents were allowed to act across trust boundaries without their own bound credentials, the resulting audit trail would become ambiguous: the cryptographic record might show where authority originated, but not which runtime instance actually exercised it, under which safeguards, or under whose operational control. Requiring independently verifi-able identity at the receiver therefore protects not only authorization correctness, but also accountability, evidentiary integrity, and non-repudiable attribution. This distinction also helps separate delegation from service invocation. When one agent calls another as a service, each party may operate under its own authorization. Delegation, by contrast, creates a chain of derived authority. Keeping this distinction explicit helps avoid unverifiable authority propagation in multi-agent systems. For this reason, the attenuation rules defined here are intended primarily for local delegation within a shared trust domain, or for exceptional cross-boundary cases governed by explicit bilateral or profile-level arrangements. 17 Figure 5: This paper distinguishes service invocation from delegation and recommends service invocation across trust boundaries, reserving delegation primarily for local trust domains. 

7.8 Audience Binding 

A credential should be bound not only to its subject but also to its intended audience. Without audience binding, an agent holding an authorization credential for one receiver could present that same credential to another receiver whose trust relationship with the issuer may be entirely different. In a JWT profile [1], this maps naturally to the aud claim. In a VC profile, it may be carried in a dedicated audience field within the authorization payload. The evaluator should reject any credential whose audience does not include the evaluator itself. 

7.9 Revocation 

Revocation introduces an online dependency regardless of encoding. A credential that survives beyond a single request-response exchange requires a mechanism by which the issuer can signal that a previously valid credential is no longer active. The behavioral requirements are straightforward. The issuer must be able to mark a credential as revoked after issuance. The evaluator must check revocation status during each evaluation attempt. A revoked credential must result in denial regardless of whether the embedded constraints would otherwise pass. Revo-cation of a parent credential in a delegation chain must invalidate all downstream delegations derived from it. In practice, mechanisms such as status lists or comparable revocation registries can satisfy this requirement. The specific mechanism is a profile concern. The semantics are not. 

7.10 Signed Audit Trail 

Every evaluation, allow or deny, should produce a cryptographically protected audit record. The record should include the credential identifier, agent identity, issuer identity, requested action, requested resource, relevant request context, each constraint’s evaluation result, the final decision, a timestamp, and the evalu-ator’s signature. Where the decision is part of a multi-agent workflow, the audit record should also include the workflow identifier, workflow role, workflow step, and the set of independently evaluated credentials or attestations relied on for the final outcome. This record serves a function analogous to a flight data recorder. It does not prevent incidents, but it ensures that when an incident occurs, a disputed settlement, a compliance violation, a suspect supply-chain attestation, the full chain of evidence is available: who authorized the agent, what constraints were in effect, what the agent requested, and why the system allowed or denied it. 18 7.11 Canonical Processing Pipeline 

The following pseudocode illustrates the canonical processing pipeline for single-credential evaluation. Aconformant implementation, given the same signed authorization, request context, applicable profile and vocabulary versions, and canonical typing and mapping rules, should produce the same authorization decision regardless of the enforcement engine used. 

function evaluate(credential, presenterIdentity, requestContext, localPolicy, trustedIssuers): ↪

container = parseContainer(credential) verificationResult = verifyContainer( container, presenterIdentity, trustedIssuers )if verificationResult is not OK: return verificationResult payload = extractAuthorizationPayload(container) if payload is missing agentId, issuerId, permissions, or constraints: return DENY("credential_incomplete") return evaluatePayload(payload, requestContext, localPolicy) function verifyContainer(container, presenterIdentity, trustedIssuers): if container.signature is invalid: return DENY("signature_invalid") // resolveIssuer includes identifier resolution plus governance validation issuer = resolveIssuer(container.issuerIdentity) if issuer not in trustedIssuers: return DENY("issuer_untrusted") if governanceRegistry does not recognize issuer for this credential type / profile: return DENY("issuer_not_vetted") if container.audience is defined and evaluatorIdentity not in container.audience: return DENY("audience_mismatch") if presenter does not prove possession of container.subjectIdentity: return DENY("proof_of_possession_failed") if container.subjectIdentity != presenterIdentity: return DENY("subject_binding_mismatch") if container is expired: return DENY("credential_expired") if container is revoked: return DENY("credential_revoked") return OK 

19 function evaluatePayload(payload, requestContext, localPolicy): if requestContext.action not in payload.permissions: return DENY("permission_denied") for each constraint in payload.constraints: if constraint.type is unknown: return DENY("constraint_unknown") if requestContext[constraint.field] is absent: return DENY("context_field_missing") if evaluateConstraint(constraint, requestContext[constraint.field]) is FAIL: return DENY("constraint_failed") for each localConstraint in localPolicy.constraints: if requestContext[localConstraint.field] is absent: return DENY("context_field_missing") if evaluateConstraint(localConstraint, requestContext[localConstraint.field]) is FAIL: ↪

return DENY("local_policy_denied") return ALLOW 

For local delegation chains, or for exceptional cross-boundary cases governed by explicit bilateral or profile-level arrangements, the pipeline is extended with a chain verification phase before terminal payload evaluation. Each link is checked for signature validity, revocation status, issuer-subject continuity, permission narrowing, and constraint attenuation. Any widening of authority, including omission of parent constraints, invalidates the chain. 

function evaluateDelegationChain(credentials[], presenterIdentity, requestContext, localPolicy, trustedIssuers, maxChainDepth): ↪

// Intended for local delegation chains or explicitly governed cross-boundary exceptions ↪

if length(credentials) > maxChainDepth: return DENY("delegation_depth_exceeded") containers = [] payloads = [] for i = 0 to length(credentials) - 1: container = parseContainer(credentials[i]) payload = extractAuthorizationPayload(container) if payload is missing agentId, issuerId, permissions, or constraints: return DENY("credential_incomplete") containers.append(container) payloads.append(payload) for i = 0 to length(containers) - 1: expectedPresenter = presenterIdentity if i == length(containers) - 1 else containers[i].subjectIdentity 

20 verificationResult = verifyContainer( containers[i], expectedPresenter, trustedIssuers )if verificationResult is not OK: return verificationResult if i > 0: if containers[i].issuerIdentity != containers[i - 1].subjectIdentity: return DENY("delegation_chain_broken") if payloads[i].permissions not subset of payloads[i - 1].permissions: return DENY("delegation_widened") for each constraint in payloads[i].constraints: if attenuation(constraint, correspondingParentConstraint) is invalid: return DENY("delegation_widened") for each parentConstraint in payloads[i - 1].constraints not represented in payloads[i].constraints: ↪

return DENY("delegation_widened") return evaluatePayload(payloads[last], requestContext, localPolicy) 

Figure 6: Authorization is re-evaluated by the receiving system at each interaction; any failed stage results in immediate denial (fail-closed). 

7.11.1 Worked Trace: Insurance Settlement Negotiation To illustrate the processing pipeline end to end, this section walks through a single authorization decision from the insurance claims use case described in Section 4. 

Credential. MegaInsure’s IAM system issues a JWT/JWS credential to its negotiator agent, 

agent:megainsure:negotiator-7 . The signed authorization payload contains: Component Value Agent Identity agent:megainsure:negotiator-7 

Issuer Identity iss:megainsure:claims-authority 

Permissions claim.settle 

Constraints see below 21 The constraint set carried in the credential is:                     

> #Type Field Operator / Values Purpose C1 TemporalWindowConstraint core.request_-time valid_from :2026-04-18T00:00:00Z ,
> valid_until :2026-04-18T23:59:59Z
> 24-hour authorization window C2 NumericLimitConstraint core.amount lte ,USD 5,000 Settlement ceiling C3 NumericLimitConstraint core.amount gte ,USD 500 Settlement floor C4 EnumeratedListConstraint insurance.claim_-type {auto_collision, auto_comprehensive}
> Claim-type restriction

Request context. The negotiator agent presents the credential to BodyShopCo’s enforcement engine and requests claim.settle for core.resource_id=claims/auto/CLM-90421 , with core.amount=USD 3,200 , insurance.claim_type=auto_collision , core.workflow_id=CLM-90421 , and core.request_-time=2026-04-18T14:32:00Z .

Pipeline execution. 

Step Function Check Result 1 parseContainer JWT structure is valid OK 2 verifyContainer :signature JWS signature verifies against MegaInsure’s published key OK 3 verifyContainer : issuer iss:megainsure:claims-authority is in BodyShopCo’s trusted issuer set OK 4 verifyContainer : audience aud includes svc:bodyshopco:claims-api OK 5 verifyContainer : proof of possession Agent proves possession of the subject key OK 6 verifyContainer : expiry and revocation Credential is not expired and not revoked OK 7 evaluatePayload :permission 

claim.settle is in the declared permission set OK 8 evaluatePayload : C1 2026-04-18T14:32:00Z is within the authorized time window PASS 9 evaluatePayload : C2 USD 3,200 <= USD 5,000 PASS 10 evaluatePayload : C3 USD 3,200 >= USD 500 PASS 11 evaluatePayload : C4 auto_collision is in {auto_collision, auto_comprehensive} 

PASS 12 Local policy BodyShopCo requires core.workflow_id to be present PASS: 

CLM-90421 

13 Decision All credential constraints and local policy checks pass ALLOW 

Denial variant. If the negotiator instead requests core.amount=USD 7,500 , step 9 evaluates USD 7,500 <= USD 5,000 as false. The pipeline returns DENY("constraint_failed") for C2. The audit record cap-tures the credential digest, denial reason, failed constraint identifier, and request context snapshot, allowing MegaInsure and BodyShopCo to determine whether the agent exceeded its authority or whether the creden-tial scope was insufficient for the claim. 

7.12 Semantic Interoperability and Resolution 

The model defines the grammar of authorization: the structure and algebra of constraints. Portability across heterogeneous receivers, however, also requires governed semantic alignment. Literal string matching for field identifiers is too brittle: an issuer may sign a constraint against one identifier while a receiver organizes the relevant request context under another. In that case, evaluation will correctly fail closed even though the signed authority is otherwise valid. Portable authorization therefore requires a semantic resolution layer that separates the stable horizontal core of the model from governed vertical industry vocabularies and mapping profiles. 22 7.12.1 Hub-and-Spoke Architecture To preserve decision consistency without requiring uniform inter-nal schemas, the model adopts a hub-and-spoke architecture for semantic identification. The hub consists of a governed Minimum Viable Vocabulary for shared authorization primitives, while the spokes consist of versioned industry profiles that extend that core for domain-specific use. The horizontal core defines a set of reserved, industry-agnostic semantic identifiers that every conformant enforcement engine must recognize and interpret consistently. These identifiers form the common semantic substrate for the core constraint algebra. The vertical profiles define domain-specific vocabularies for industries such as insurance or aerospace. These profiles introduce specialized fields, actions, and aliases, but do so under explicit governance and versioning. They are discoverable through the trust and governance frameworks described in Section 7.6.1 and are intended to extend the core rather than fragment it. This architecture allows the semantic model to remain stable across domains while giving industries room to express their own specialized concepts without sacrificing portability. 

7.12.2 Minimum Viable Vocabulary To prevent each deployment from becoming its own integration silo, the model defines a Minimum Viable Vocabulary consisting of shared authorization primitives that every conformant enforcement engine must recognize without requiring live external resolution at evaluation time. These primitives are represented as reserved semantic identifiers so that the evaluator can remain local, deterministic, and fail-closed. For the purposes of this model, the horizontal core vocabulary is the enumerated set below. The table defines the reserved identifier, canonical type, status, and intended meaning. Required means that every conformant evaluator must recognize the identifier and its type. Conditional means that the identifier is not required in every request, but if a credential, constraint, or profile references it, the evaluator must resolve it through a trusted mapping profile or fail closed. Advanced means that the identifier is reserved for implementations that claim support for stateful governance profiles. Identifier Type Status Description 

core.issuer_id String identifier Required Entity that issued and signed the authorization. 

core.subject_id String identifier Required Agent or principal to whom the authorization applies. 

core.presenter_id String identifier Required Runtime actor presenting the credential at the receiver boundary. 

core.audience_id String identifier Required Intended receiver or receiver class for audience binding. 

core.permission String identifier Required Declared action or permission carried by the authorization payload. 

core.valid_from Timestamp Required Earliest time at which the authorization may be accepted. 

core.valid_until Timestamp Required Latest time at which the authorization may be accepted. 23 Identifier Type Status Description 

core.request_time Timestamp Required Time of the action-bearing request, normalized for temporal evaluation. 

core.delegator_id String identifier Conditional Prior authority in a delegation chain. Required when delegated authority is evaluated. 

core.recipient_id String identifier Conditional Counterparty, payee, recipient system, or recipient role for recipient restrictions. 

core.action String identifier Conditional Requested operation when a receiver distinguishes action from permission namespace. 

core.resource_id String identifier Conditional Specific object, record, document, component, or resource being acted on. 

core.resource_type String identifier Conditional Category of resource, such as claim, invoice, part, shipment, or attestation. 

core.amount Decimal number Conditional Monetary or quantitative value for the current action. 

core.currency_code String code Conditional Currency associated with core.amount ,where monetary limits are used. 

core.quantity Decimal number Conditional Non-monetary measured amount, such as units, weight, volume, or countable quantity. 

core.count Integer Conditional Number of items, records, disclosures, attempts, or actions in the current request. 

core.total_budget Decimal number Conditional Maximum aggregate value authorized by the credential or applicable profile. 

core.geo_region String identifier Conditional Geographic region, jurisdiction, or data-sovereignty boundary used for location-sensitive constraints. 24 Identifier Type Status Description 

core.ip_address IP address string Conditional Network source address when network-origin restrictions are part of the governing profile. 

core.request_id String identifier Conditional Receiver-local or cross-domain request identifier used for audit correlation. 

core.workflow_id String identifier Conditional Correlation identifier for a multi-agent or multi-step workflow. 

core.workflow_role String identifier Conditional Role played by the presenting agent within a collaborative workflow. 

core.workflow_step_id String identifier Conditional Specific workflow step, approval stage, or evidence contribution being authorized. 

core.state_-authority_pointer 

URI or string identifier Advanced Authoritative state source, registry, ledger, or voucher authority for cumulative governance. 

core.state_sequence Integer Advanced Monotonic sequence value used by verifiable state proofs to prevent rollback or replay. 

core.state_timestamp Timestamp Advanced Signed state observation time used to evaluate freshness within the applicable drift envelope. Runtime enforcement remains local and deterministic. Semantic agreement is established in advance through governed vocabularies and mapping profiles rather than through live runtime dereferencing. 

7.12.3 Vertical Industry Profiles and Aliasing Domain vocabularies extend the horizontal core but do not replace it. A conformant implementation uses governed semantic aliasing to map local request structures to shared semantic identifiers defined either in the core or in an applicable governed industry profile. When a credential is presented, the enforcement engine must determine how the signed semantic identifiers in the credential map to the receiver’s local request structure. It does so by consulting a machine-readable mapping profile that defines approved aliases between local field names and the shared identifiers defined by the core vocabulary or an applicable governed profile. If a local field is explicitly declared as an alias of the signed identifier, the engine may resolve the names and evaluate the constraint against the corresponding local field. The purpose of this step is not to reinterpret the authorization, but to reconcile naming differences while preserving the semantics of the signed policy. This model achieves portability without requiring every receiver to adopt identical internal schema names. Just as importantly, it separates semantic agreement from runtime enforcement : mappings are estab-lished in advance through governed profiles, while runtime evaluation operates only on pre-resolved identifiers and validated aliases. 25 7.12.4 Type-Safe Coercion and Risk Mitigation Moving from literal string matching to governed semantic mapping reduces one class of interoperability failure, but it also creates a need for strong guardrails. To preserve safety, the enforcement engine must apply type-safe coercion rules. Any mapping that produces an ambiguous type conversion or an uncertain semantic match must result in denial. A NumericLimitConstraint can be mapped to a local field only if that field is explicitly typed as numeric in the applicable mapping profile. A categorical constraint must not be coerced into a monetary field merely because the local schema is underspecified or loosely typed. If a mapping profile is missing, unreachable, stale beyond its permitted governance window, or contains conflicting aliases for the same field, the evaluator must fail closed. Profiles must declare their supported vocabularies explicitly so that semantic compatibility between an agent and a service provider can be validated before an action-bearing interaction begins. This preserves the fail-closed property of the broader model while allowing authorization semantics to remain portable across heterogeneous systems. 

7.12.5 Semantic Field Resolution as a Diagnostic Gate Semantic resolution serves as a diagnostic gate between the portable authorization credential and the receiver’s local execution context. Its function is to determine whether a signed semantic identifier can be mapped safely and unambiguously to a local field under the applicable governed profile. The model does not attempt to automate all semantic recovery. Instead, when resolution fails, the evaluator fails closed and returns a typed denial reason. That denial reason may be used by external orchestration, human review, or out-of-band profile reconciliation mechanisms, but any such recovery remains outside the normative evaluation pipeline. The following pseudocode illustrates the canonical fail-closed procedure for resolving signed semantic identi-fiers to local request fields prior to constraint evaluation. 

function resolveSemanticField(constraint, requestContext, mappingProfile, applicableProfileVocabulary): ↪

if mappingProfile is missing: return DENY("mapping_profile_missing") if mappingProfile is stale beyond its permitted governance window or untrusted: return DENY("mapping_profile_invalid") signedIdentifier = constraint.field if signedIdentifier is in coreVocabulary: expectedType = coreVocabulary[signedIdentifier].type else if signedIdentifier is in applicableProfileVocabulary: expectedType = applicableProfileVocabulary[signedIdentifier].type else: return DENY("semantic_identifier_unknown") if mappingProfile has conflicting aliases for signedIdentifier: return DENY("semantic_alias_conflict") localField = mappingProfile.resolveAlias(signedIdentifier) if localField is missing: return DENY("semantic_alias_missing") if mappingProfile.typeOf(localField) != expectedType: return DENY("semantic_type_mismatch") 

26 if requestContext[localField] is absent: return DENY("context_field_missing") return OK(requestContext[localField]) 

7.12.5.1 Constraint Enforcement After Resolution Once semantic resolution succeeds, constraint enforcement proceeds against the resolved field without altering the meaning of the signed authorization. 

resolutionResult = resolveSemanticField( constraint, requestContext, mappingProfile, applicableProfileVocabulary )if resolutionResult is not OK: return resolutionResult resolvedValue = resolutionResult.value if evaluateConstraint(constraint, resolvedValue) is FAIL: return DENY("constraint_failed") 

7.12.5.2 Determinism Invariant and External Recovery The semantic resolution layer must pre-serve the determinism of the broader authorization model. For any fixed signed authorization credential C,request context R, applicable profile and vocabulary versions V, and governed mapping profile M, a confor-mant evaluator must produce a single authorization decision D ∈ {ALLOW, DENY}. The evaluator may additionally emit typed diagnostic metadata, but such metadata does not alter the decision domain. This constraint is essential. Any mechanism that leaves the authorization outcome dependent on interactive negotiation, probabilistic recovery, or implementation-specific semantic guesswork would violate the deter-minism invariant on which portability and standardization depend. Semantic resolution is therefore not an open-ended attempt to recover meaning from arbitrary local schemas. It is a governed validation step that either resolves the signed identifier safely and unambiguously, or fails closed. Typed denial reasons remain important even within this binary model. A denial caused by semantic_-alias_missing , mapping_profile_invalid , semantic_type_mismatch , or context_field_missing may be used by surrounding systems as a diagnostic signal for metadata refresh, bilateral profile alignment, human review, or other out-of-band remediation. Such recovery mechanisms may be operationally useful, but they remain external to the normative evaluation pipeline. The role of the standard is to ensure that every engagement attempt yields a verifiable, deterministic, and diagnosable outcome, and that autonomous execution never proceeds under conditions of unresolved semantic ambiguity. 

7.13 Pre-flight Discovery Protocol 

Portable authorization is not operationally useful if semantic compatibility is discovered only at the moment of enforcement. In that model, otherwise valid integrations become brittle: credentials fail because of vocabulary mismatch, unsupported profiles, incompatible trust anchors, or missing context fields that could have been identified earlier. The purpose of pre-flight discovery is therefore not to guarantee that every workflow will succeed, but to reduce integration brittleness by turning semantic incompatibility into an explicit, deterministic, and diagnosable admission outcome before an action-bearing request is attempted. Under this model, the receiver publishes a signed, versioned, and cacheable governance contract describing the vocabularies, profiles, trust anchors, and required context fields it accepts. A sender may resolve its credential fields against this published contract before presentation in order to determine likely compatibility, but that 27 step is advisory rather than authoritative. Authoritative interpretation remains entirely with the receiver’s enforcement engine, which performs the same semantic resolution and policy evaluation at admission time. If the sender determines pre-flight that its credential is incompatible, the workflow fails early, or is rerouted before runtime effort is wasted. If the sender incorrectly concludes that it is compatible, the receiver still remains authoritative and denies the request. In that case, the failure reflects contract drift, stale metadata, or a non-conformant sender implementation, not a failure of receiver-side enforcement. 

7.13.1 Discovery Endpoint A conformant service provider should expose a standardized discovery end-point, such as /.well-known/agent-governance [8], that publishes this governance contract as a machine-readable manifest. The manifest is a public interoperability declaration, not a disclosure of private policy logic. At a minimum, it declares the supported vocabularies and profile versions, accepted trust anchors or trust registries, required request-context fields, and the version and freshness metadata needed for safe caching and validation. To prevent tampering or misbinding, the manifest must itself be cryptographically signed by the receiver, or otherwise integrity-protected in a manner verifiable against the same trust infrastructure used to authenticate the receiver. Because the manifest is static, version-controlled metadata rather than per-request negotiation state, it can be cached safely within its declared validity window. Senders may consult it pre-flight to estimate compatibility, while the receiver’s enforcement engine, or an authoritative local equivalent of the same manifest, remains solely responsible for final semantic resolution and authorization decisions at admission time. The manifest therefore reduces ambiguity without shifting decision authority away from the receiver. 

7.13.2 Discovery Sequence The discovery process follows a structured sequence designed to reduce operational friction while preserving receiver authority. First, the sender retrieves the receiver’s published governance manifest, either directly or from a cached copy within its declared validity window. Second, the sender compares that manifest against its own supported profiles, trust anchors, available credentials, and required context fields in order to determine likely compatibility. Third, if a compatible path exists, the sender selects the credential it intends to present and, where appropriate, attenuates its authority locally so that the presented credential remains narrowly scoped and consistent with the receiver’s published interoperability contract. The important design point is that this process occurs before execution and remains advisory on the sender side. It is a pre-flight compatibility and governance check, not a per-request negotiation loop and not a substitute for receiver-side enforcement. 

7.13.3 Privacy and Security Safeguards Pre-flight discovery also serves a privacy and security function. By consulting the receiver’s published governance contract in advance, a sender can avoid over-sharing or presenting sensitive credentials to an endpoint that does not advertise a compatible trust or semantic framework. The manifest therefore advertises only public interoperability requirements. It does not disclose the receiver’s private internal policies, local thresholds, or proprietary enforcement logic. Transport protection such as TLS is helpful but not sufficient on its own; the manifest must be cryptographically bound to the receiver’s identity so that the sender can verify that the published contract actually originated from the intended service provider. If the sender determines pre-flight that it cannot meet the receiver’s published trust, profile, or semantic requirements, the workflow can fail early or be rerouted before any sensitive authorization credential is presented. 

7.14 Integration with Trust Registries 

The discovery manifest situates an interaction within the broader governance framework described earlier in Section 7.6.1. By referencing specific trust anchors, registries, and governed profiles, the receiver publishes the trust and semantic domain within which presented credentials will be interpreted. This supports mutual compatibility checking without weakening receiver authority. A sender may determine whether it is likely to be compatible with the receiver’s published governance contract before initiating 28 an action-bearing exchange, while the receiver’s enforcement engine remains solely responsible for final interpretation and admission decisions. The same mechanism also supports dynamic governance: when an industry registry changes the standing of an issuer, updates accepted credential classes, or revises profile support, those changes can propagate into future interactions through the published manifest without altering the core evaluation semantics. A typical governance manifest identifies the receiver, declares the supported profile versions, specifies which trust registries are accepted for which credential classes, and enumerates the semantic context fields required for authorization evaluation. It does not replace trust registries or the portable authorization credential itself; rather, it publishes the receiver’s interoperability contract in a form that allows compatibility to be assessed in advance and enforced consistently at admission time. 

7.14.1 Governance of Governance Artifacts Governed vocabularies, trust registries, and mapping profiles are not self-authorizing. A conformant ecosystem must treat them as governed artifacts with clear stewardship, versioning, auditability, and transition rules. The model does not require a single global author-ity. A steward may be an industry consortium, regulator, standards body, enterprise federation, or bilateral governance group. What matters is that the receiver can identify which steward it trusts for a given profile, which public keys or trust anchors authenticate that steward, and which signed artifact versions are accepted at enforcement time. Profile conflicts are resolved by explicit selection, not by runtime negotiation or semantic guessing. If two industry profiles define incompatible meanings for the same domain concept, they must remain distinguish-able by profile identifier, namespace, and version. A receiver may choose one, accept both under separate namespaces, or reject the interaction if the credential depends on an unsupported or ambiguous profile. The enforcement engine must not merge conflicting profile semantics on its own. Governance artifacts should be released as immutable, signed versions with machine-readable metadata: profile identifier, version, effective date, expiration or review date, issuing steward, artifact digest, predecessor or successor relationship, and compatibility notes. Minor updates may add aliases or clarify descriptions without changing evaluation meaning. Breaking changes should require a new major profile version and a defined migration window. Receiver manifests should pin the accepted versions or version ranges so that both sender-side pre-flight checks and receiver-side enforcement operate against the same published contract. During governance transitions, such as trust-anchor rotation, registry operator change, or profile deprecation, the safe default is overlap followed by fail-closed. The outgoing and incoming authorities may both be accepted only during an explicitly declared transition window and only if the receiver’s governance manifest lists both. Once the transition window expires, credentials, profiles, mapping profiles, or state authorities anchored only in the deprecated governance path must be rejected. Audit records should capture the registry version, profile version, manifest digest, and trust anchor used for each decision so that later disputes can be reconstructed from the exact governance state in force at the time of evaluation. 29 Figure 7: Pre-flight discovery uses a published, signed governance manifest to support advisory compatibility checking before credential presentation, while preserving authoritative receiver-side enforcement at admission time. 

7.15 Illustrative Reference Architecture 

The preceding sections define the normative semantic and governance model. The figure below illustrates one possible reference architecture for implementing published governance contracts, sender-side compatibil-ity checking, and receiver-side semantic resolution and enforcement. The figure is illustrative rather than normative: conformant implementations may realize the same model using different protocol bindings, trust frameworks, and enforcement components. 30 Figure 8: Illustrative reference architecture for published governance contracts, sender-side compatibility checking, and receiver-side semantic resolution and enforcement. 

7.16 Threat Model and Security Considerations 

The model assumes that standard cryptographic primitives remain secure, that trusted issuers protect their signing keys, and that receivers operate their enforcement engines within their own trusted computing boundary. The attacker may observe, replay, relay, modify, or present authorization credentials; attempt to exploit semantic mismatches; poison or replay governance metadata; impersonate state authorities; or present stale cumulative-state evidence. The attacker is not assumed to be able to forge valid signatures from uncompromised issuers or break the underlying cryptographic algorithms. 

Threat Attack Pattern Mitigation in the Model Residual Risk 

Credential forgery Attacker fabricates or modifies an authorization credential Signature verification, issuer trust validation, proof of possession Compromised issuer keys remain a governance and revocation problem Credential relay Attacker relays a valid credential to a different receiver or context Audience binding, proof of possession, subject binding, receiver-side evaluation Stronger profiles may add nonce, channel, or transaction binding Delegation widening Delegate attempts to gain broader authority than parent Attenuation rules, most-restrictive-wins, denial if parent constraints are omitted Incorrect implementation of attenuation remains a conformance risk Semantic alias poisoning Mapping profile maps a signed identifier to the wrong local field Governed mapping profiles, type-safe coercion, alias conflict detection, fail-closed behavior Governance failure in profile publication or approval remains possible 31 Threat Attack Pattern Mitigation in the Model Residual Risk 

Stale or compromised mapping profile Receiver uses outdated or tampered semantic metadata Signed manifests, versioning, freshness windows, trust-registry validation Incorrect cache policy may cause avoidable denials or stale interpretation Discovery manifest tampering Attacker publishes false compatibility or trust metadata Cryptographic binding of manifest to receiver identity Private receiver policy is still not disclosed or negotiated State authority spoofing Attacker points evaluator to an unrecognized or malicious state source Signed stateAuthori-tyPointer ,trust-registry validation, fail-closed on unrecognized authority Issuer-selected low-assurance state authorities create synchronization risk Stale cumulative state Agent presents old state voucher or stale quota evidence Freshness and monotonicity invariant, 

Δ𝑡 envelope, signed audit record Lag within accepted Δ𝑡 

is a governance tradeoff Request-context manipulation Attacker alters local context fields used for evaluation Receiver-side enforcement, trusted request context, fail-closed on missing fields If the receiver’s local context is compromised, the model cannot correct it Audit suppression Enforcer allows action but omits signed audit record Mandatory signed audit record requirement Enforcement engines must be certified or monitored for conformance The model therefore reduces ambiguity and replay risk, but it does not eliminate the need for operational security around issuers, receivers, registries, and state authorities. A compromised issuer key, malicious receiver, corrupted local request context, or governance failure in a trust registry remains outside the ability of the authorization credential alone to repair. The purpose of the model is to make such failures detectable, attributable, and fail-closed where possible. 

7.17 Privacy Considerations 

A portable authorization credential is not only a security artifact; it is also a privacy-bearing artifact. A rich signed payload may reveal the agent’s identity, issuer relationship, delegated role, transaction limits, permit-ted counterparties, workflow identifiers, trust anchors, or state authority references. Across organizational boundaries, these fields can expose more business context than the receiver strictly needs in order to make the current authorization decision. Privacy therefore has to be treated as part of the credential and profile design, not as an afterthought. The first privacy risk is credential correlation . If the same credential identifier, subject identifier, proof-of-possession key, workflow identifier, or distinctive constraint set is reused across multiple receivers, colluding receivers may be able to link the agent’s activity across otherwise separate contexts. Audience binding helps, but it is not always sufficient by itself. Profiles should prefer receiver-scoped credentials, short-lived presentation artifacts, audience-specific proof keys, and pairwise or scoped subject identifiers where business accountability permits them. The goal is to let the receiver verify the authority needed for this interaction without turning the credential into a universal tracking handle. As noted in the W3C Verifiable Credentials Data Model 2.0 privacy considerations, stable identifiers and proof artifacts can enable identifier-based and signature-based correlation across verifiers [7]. VC-based authorization profiles should therefore prefer receiver-scoped issuance, short lifetimes, minimized disclosure, 32 and audit records that retain credential digests or normalized evaluation facts rather than storing the full credential by default. The second risk is over-disclosure . The authorization payload should carry only the facts required for the receiver’s enforcement decision. A receiver that needs to know that a settlement is below USD 5,000 does not necessarily need the delegator’s broader budget, internal approval hierarchy, or unrelated permissions. The pre-flight discovery mechanism in Section 7.13 supports this by allowing the sender to determine which profiles, fields, and trust anchors the receiver accepts before presenting an authorization credential. That discovery step should be used to select the narrowest sufficient credential or attenuation, not the most information-rich credential available. The third risk is audit over-retention . Signed audit records are necessary for accountability, but they may also preserve sensitive context long after the transaction has completed. Implementations should distinguish between fields required for non-repudiation and dispute resolution, and fields that are merely convenient for debugging. Retention windows, access controls, redaction policies, and jurisdictional requirements should be part of the applicable profile or governance contract. Selective-disclosure and zero-knowledge techniques may reduce over-exposure in advanced profiles. For ex-ample, a credential holder may be able to prove that a trusted issuer granted authority for a bounded action, that a monetary value is within an authorized range, or that a recipient belongs to an approved category without revealing unrelated claims. The core model does not require a specific selective-disclosure mecha-nism, because doing so would bind the authorization semantics to a particular cryptographic construction. It does, however, require that any such profile preserve deterministic evaluation: the receiver must still obtain, or be able to verify, the typed facts needed for semantic resolution, constraint evaluation, auditability, and fail-closed behavior. If a privacy-preserving proof hides a field that the evaluator must resolve in order to decide, the evaluator must deny rather than guess. Privacy Concern Example Mitigation Direction Cross-receiver correlation Same credential or subject identifier reused at multiple receivers Audience-specific credentials, pairwise identifiers, short-lived presentations Over-broad payload Credential reveals unrelated roles, limits, or internal approval structure Data minimization, attenuation, profile-specific required fields Discovery leakage Sender reveals sensitive capability information during compatibility checking Public receiver manifests, sender-side local comparison, no private policy negotiation Audit over-retention Audit record stores more business context than needed for later dispute resolution Profile-defined retention, access control, redaction, jurisdictional controls Privacy-preserving proof mismatch Selective-disclosure proof hides a field required for evaluation Typed disclosure commitments or fail-closed denial 

7.17.1 VC Profile Considerations VC-based profiles are a valid container option for this model, espe-cially where portable issuer verifiability and decentralized trust resolution are useful across trust boundaries. Some privacy concerns discussed in the VC ecosystem arise most strongly in human-centric credential set-tings and are less acute in enterprise agent authorization, where auditability, issuer accountability, and non-repudiation are often intentional design goals rather than side effects to be minimized at all costs. Even so, VC profiles introduce real operational tradeoffs. Stable identifiers and proof artifacts can still create correlation risk if credentials are reused broadly across receivers. Status and revocation mechanisms introduce additional lifecycle complexity. JSON-LD and Data Integrity deployments may also impose higher verification overhead than JWT/JWS-based profiles. These are profile-level tradeoffs, not objections to the authorization model itself. Deployments that prioritize lower operational overhead may prefer JWT/JWS 33 profiles, while deployments that need stronger cross-boundary portability or decentralized trust resolution may prefer VC profiles. 

# 8. Discussion and Related Work 

8.1 Related Work 

The problem of agent authorization across trust boundaries has attracted growing attention. Several recent proposals address fragments of the challenge; none addresses the full surface described here. 

A-JWT [10] extends JWT-based agent authorization with intent binding and delegation-oriented claims. It is valuable for improving traceability of who authorized a given call and under what asserted context. The model proposed here differs in focus: rather than centering primarily on invocation-bound delegation, it defines a portable authorization payload with typed constraints, explicit attenuation semantics, and shared cross-receiver evaluation behavior. 

Authenticated delegation for AI agents [28] proposes an OAuth/OpenID Connect-oriented framework in which users delegate authority to AI agents through agent-specific credentials, delegation tokens, scope restrictions, and audit metadata. That work is closely aligned with the delegation and accountability problem space addressed here, but it leaves the portable authorization semantics largely to the credential or access-control profile. The model proposed in this paper is complementary: it defines the common semantic layer that such delegation credentials would need to carry and preserve across containers, receivers, and trust boundaries. 

Recent agent identity protocol efforts [9], including those built around Biscuit [12]- or Datalog-style embeddings, recognize the need for offline attenuation, multi-hop delegation, and provenance-aware evidence. Their strength lies in expressive delegation and policy representation. The model proposed here makes a different tradeoff: it constrains the core authorization algebra more tightly in order to improve determin-istic interoperability across independent receivers, so that ecosystems need not align on a general-purpose embedded logic in addition to a common artifact format. 

Dimension Logic-Embedded Approaches Proposed Model 

Policy expressiveness High Deliberately constrained Interoperability burden Requires alignment on evaluation logic Requires alignment on constrained shared semantics Best fit Rich local or ecosystem-specific policy environments Portable cross-receiver authorization with shared evaluation semantics 

UCAN [11] provides a strong capability-based model for delegation, attenuation, and cryptographic chaining. Its main focus, however, is capability transfer rather than a standardized constraint algebra for enterprise-style authorization conditions such as monetary bounds, temporal windows, recipient restrictions, or cumu-lative exposure controls. The model proposed here is intended to address that more constrained but more portable cross-receiver authorization problem. 

zCAP-LD [23], [24] is especially relevant because it makes the separation between an authorization envelope and a caveat language explicit. That architectural move aligns with this paper’s separation of container from authorization meaning. However, zCAP-LD remains an incubating W3C Credentials Community Group work item as of April 2026 rather than a finalized global standard, and its center of gravity is still capability delegation and invocation. This paper therefore treats zCAP-LD as informative prior art and as a possible future container/profile option, not as a normative dependency. 

XACML [13], OPA [14], and Cedar [15] are highly relevant because they demonstrate that fine-grained policy evaluation is operationally feasible. They are primarily oriented around receiver-authored policy evaluation, however, rather than around a standardized, issuer-authored portable authorization payload that independent conformant receivers can use to reach consistent authorization decisions without bespoke 34 bilateral policy logic. The gap addressed here is therefore not whether these systems can perform fine-grained evaluation, but whether they define a portable policy payload with shared semantics across independent receivers. 

ODRL [22] is relevant as a standardized policy model and vocabulary. The model proposed here does not adopt ODRL’s full policy algebra, rule taxonomy, or logical combinators as normative requirements. Instead, selected ODRL-style constraint terms could be used in an optional serialization or compatibility profile where they preserve the conjunctive, total, and fail-closed evaluation semantics defined in this paper. ODRL is therefore best understood here as a possible vocabulary-alignment path, not as a replacement for the core authorization model. 

OpenID AuthZEN [21] is an important adjacent effort because it standardizes the interface between a Policy Enforcement Point and a Policy Decision Point. Its focus is the authorization API: how a PEP asks for an access decision, how the PDP returns that decision, and how PDP metadata and capabilities can be discovered. This paper is complementary rather than competing. AuthZEN can standardize the decision-call boundary inside or across systems, while the model proposed here standardizes what bounded authority an agent carries, how that authority is expressed, and how independent receivers evaluate it deterministically across trust boundaries. 

SPIFFE and workload identity systems [18] provide strong presenter identity within and across trust domains, but they do not themselves define portable authorization semantics. They are therefore complemen-tary: presenter authentication can be handled by SPIFFE-style mechanisms, while authorization is carried in the portable authorization credential defined here. 

8.2 Liability and Accountability 

The authorization semantic model does not, and cannot, resolve the underlying legal question of liability when an autonomous agent causes financial or operational harm. Liability remains a matter of contract law, terms and conditions, and established regulatory frameworks. What the model does provide is the evidentiary infrastructure without which liability determination in multi-agent systems becomes speculative or impossible. In traditional enterprise workflows, a human signature or manual approval provides a clear point of account-ability. In agentic systems, the responsibility chain must instead be reconstructed from digital artifacts: who empowered the agent, what constraints were in force, what request was made, what evaluation oc-curred, and what outcome was produced. The signed credential, the evaluation trace, and the signed audit record together provide this reconstruction. However, for that reconstruction to be legally and operationally meaningful, the model must also account for the security context in which the agent was authenticated and operated. 

8.2.1 Capturing Security Context for Reasonable Care To support dispute resolution and post-incident analysis, the signed audit trail should capture not only the agent’s identity and authorization state, but also relevant technical metadata about how the agent was authenticated and protected at the time of action. This creates a factual basis for determining whether the principal i.e., the user, enterprise, or delegated authority behind the agent exercised reasonable care in securing that agent. A first distinction concerns hardware versus software binding . An audit record should be able to indicate whether the agent’s signing keys or credentials were protected by stronger controls such as a hardware security module, trusted execution environment, or another rooted hardware boundary, or whether they relied on software-based storage alone. This distinction matters when an incident later raises the question of whether the failure arose from flawed business logic, weak operational controls, or credential compromise. A second concern is credential integrity and compromise posture . In the event of unauthorized spend, fraudulent approval, or improper evidence disclosure, technical metadata about the credential’s protection state allows investigators, insurers, courts, or regulators to distinguish between a systemic decision failure and a security breach. An agent that acted within its signed policy but under flawed human-defined logic 35 presents a different accountability picture from an agent whose credentials were exfiltrated because its keys were poorly protected. A third concern is attestation of environment . Where available, the audit record should include signed attestations about the agent’s execution environment, such as whether the agent was running in an expected workload, trusted runtime, or verified platform state at the time the action occurred. This extends the evidentiary function of the audit trail beyond the decision itself and into the surrounding trust state of the system that produced it. By formalizing the capture of this security context, the model does not attempt to automate liability al-location. Rather, it strengthens the evidentiary basis on which liability, negligence, breach, or compliance failure may later be assessed. In a cross-boundary agent ecosystem, this level of technical transparency is likely to be necessary if organizations are to enter into the contractual and governance arrangements that meaningful autonomous collaboration will require. 

8.2.2 Protocol Conformance and Liability Partition Under Infrastructure Lag The model does not determine ultimate legal liability, but it does define a protocol-level notion of reasonable care. In this context, reasonable care is not a guarantee of perfect outcomes. It is conformance to the active enforcement contract: the applicable governance manifest, trust-registry requirements, permitted state authority model, profile-defined freshness envelope Δ𝑡 , and mandatory audit obligations. This matters when the protocol is followed correctly but the business outcome is still harmful because of infrastructure lag. If the issuer binds a permitted stateAuthorityPointer into the credential, it is appointing that state source as authoritative for cumulative governance under the applicable profile. If an enforcer verifies freshness within the active Δ𝑡 , a harmful outcome caused by synchronization lag within that envelope should not by itself imply enforcer negligence. In protocol terms, the enforcer acted conformantly against the authoritative source and freshness assumptions accepted by the governance model. Responsibility shifts when the enforcer bypasses those safety gates. If the audit trail shows that the enforcer accepted an unpermitted state authority, ignored state older than the active Δ𝑡 , or failed to produce the required signed audit record, the failure is no longer attributable merely to infrastructure lag. It becomes a failure of protocol conformance. Failure Scenario Presumptive Responsibility Under the Enforcement Contract Primary Evidence Source Credential exfiltration or key compromise Issuer / principal-side security failure Technical protection metadata, revocation records Logic or policy flaw in signed authority Issuer / delegating authority Signed authorization payload, evaluation trace Synchronization lag within permitted Δ𝑡 

Issuer-selected governance model / appointed state authority Voucher timestamp, profile-defined Δ𝑡 , audit trail Enforcer bypasses required state check Enforcer non-conformance Audit trail Enforcer accepts stale state outside permitted Δ𝑡 

Enforcer non-conformance Audit trail, voucher timestamp, profile-defined Δ𝑡 

Enforcer accepts unpermitted state authority Enforcer non-conformance Trust-registry verification record, audit trail Missing signed audit record Enforcer non-conformance Absence of required audit artifact 

8.3 Temporal Model Considerations 

The two use cases examined in this paper expose a tension in temporal semantics. Insurance claims processing is predominantly point-in-time: a request arrives, the evaluator checks whether the current moment falls within the credential’s temporal window, and a decision is made. 36 Supply-chain integrity workflows unfold over longer periods, and the relevant question may sometimes be not only whether a request is currently valid, but whether a given attestation was valid at the time it was created or transferred. The model proposed here directly addresses the first of these temporal dimensions. It supports point-in-time authorization for requesting, relaying, and presenting evidence, while preserving provenance, delegation integrity, and auditability across those interactions. Longer-horizon adjudication of historical evidentiary validity introduces an additional temporal layer that may be better served by profile extensions such as shared evidence logs, verifiable historical status records, or other cross-domain provenance mechanisms, without changing the core evaluation model. 

8.4 Semantic Mapping Risk 

Governed semantic mapping introduces a category of risk that does not arise when both parties use identical, pre-agreed field names. If a credential constrains one semantic identifier but the receiver maps it incorrectly to a local field, the evaluator may execute correctly against the wrong resolved input. This is the central tradeoff of semantic portability across heterogeneous systems. The alternative would be to require all issuers and receivers to adopt identical field names and internal schemas. This would sharply limit portability and reduce adoption to tightly pre-negotiated bilateral rela-tionships. The mitigation is therefore not to abandon semantic mapping, but to govern it strictly through versioned profiles, validated aliases, type-safe coercion, and fail-closed enforcement, while allowing domain vocabularies to converge over time. 

8.5 Stateful Governance and Enforcement Contracts 

The model focuses primarily on stateless evaluation in order to prioritize high-performance, deterministic outcomes without requiring a synchronous dependency on a global state store. This design choice is useful for portability and predictable enforcement. For enterprise-grade deployments, particularly in financial services and high-velocity coordination settings, however, it also leaves a cumulative gap. A purely per-action ceiling constrains each individual action but does not by itself bound aggregate exposure across a sequence of otherwise valid actions, leaving organizations exposed to substantial financial and operational risk. 

8.5.1 The Enforcement Contract: Mutual Protection and Reasonable Care To address this, stateful constraints can be understood as part of an enforcement contract between the issuer and the enforcer. This framing does not attempt to redefine legal liability. Rather, it captures the idea that both parties have a due-diligence interest in ensuring that authority remains bounded over time. The issuer uses cumulative or rate-aware constraints to communicate a meaningful stop-loss boundary. The enforcer, by respecting those limits, demonstrates that it acted with reasonable care rather than treating a sequence of individually valid requests as unlimited aggregate authority. In this sense, stateful governance serves as mutual protection. For the issuer, a cumulative limit helps prevent treasury depletion, rolling budget overrun, or runaway exposure caused by individually compliant but collectively excessive actions. For the enforcer, respecting such limits provides a defensible basis for transaction clearance, payout control, infrastructure protection, and post-incident review. 

Constraint Type Issuer Motivation (Risk Control) Enforcer Motivation (Due Diligence) 

Numeric Limit Prevents total treasury depletion Ensures transaction clearance remains within authorized mandate Temporal Window Ensures operational and policy alignment Confirms regulatory and audit compliance Enumerated List Restricts categories, recipients, or jurisdictions Prevents out-of-scope handling or disclosure 37 Constraint Type Issuer Motivation (Risk Control) Enforcer Motivation (Due Diligence) 

String Pattern Bounds resource namespace and evidence scope Prevents unauthorized traversal across resource domains Velocity / Rate Guards against algorithmic runaway behavior Protects infrastructure from unintended denial-of-service patterns 

8.5.2 Proposed Extension: CumulativeLimitConstraint Unlike the stateless constraints described in Section 7.3, the CumulativeLimitConstraint is designed to govern aggregate risk across an otherwise unbounded sequence of autonomous actions. This extension is best understood as an advanced profile layered on top of the stateless core, not as a requirement of the normative model itself. This constraint type is not self-contained. Instead, it binds the authorization grant to a specific external source of truth through a mandatory stateAuthorityPointer .The stateAuthorityPointer is a cryptographically signed URI or equivalent identifier embedded within the credential that points to the authoritative state store. Depending on the deployment profile, this may reference a balance registry, a distributed ledger entry, a governed high-performance counter, or another trusted state authority. Evaluation therefore proceeds in two stages. First, the enforcement engine validates the individual request against any applicable per-action ceiling. Second, it queries the referenced stateAuthorityPointer to determine whether the cumulative value after the requested action remains within the authorized aggregate budget for the relevant period. The integrity requirements remain fail-closed. If the referenced state authority is unreachable, stale beyond the allowed threshold, or otherwise unverifiable, the evaluator must deny the request. The evaluator must also validate that the referenced stateAuthorityPointer is permitted by the relevant trust-registry entry described in Section 7.6.1.1. This ensures that autonomous action does not proceed under conditions of unresolved financial or operational uncertainty or against an unrecognized state authority. This structure makes an important separation explicit: the what , the cumulative limit itself, and the where ,the authoritative state pointer, are signed together inside the credential. The question of who is allowed to host that state authority is governed externally through the trust-registry framework described in Section 7.6.1.1. 

Figure 9: Stateful enforcement of cumulative limits through an external state authority. The credential signs both the cumulative limit and the pointer to the authoritative state source; the enforcement engine evaluates 

38 both the current action and the cumulative state, while the trust registry governs which state authorities are acceptable. 

8.5.3 Verifiable State Proofs To maintain portability in decentralized or multi-party environments where a persistent connection to a stateAuthorityPointer is not guaranteed, the model can support verifiable state proofs as an advanced profile. Under this pattern, the agent carries a cryptographically signed state voucher that serves as an attestation of its current spent balance or remaining quota. Upon each successful request, the enforcer updates the voucher and signs a new balance proof. A subsequent enforcer verifies the chain of state updates before accepting the voucher as the current state. This makes it more difficult for an agent to replay an older, more permissive state artifact in an attempt to bypass the CumulativeLimitConstraint .Verifiable state proofs therefore offer a decentralized analogue to a centralized balance registry, while preserv-ing cryptographic continuity across multiple enforcers. This mechanism is best viewed as an advanced profile rather than a mandatory core requirement. It introduces additional considerations around replay resistance, ordering, and proof freshness, but it provides a viable path for cumulative governance in environments where centralized state coordination is impractical. 

Figure 10: Verifiable state proofs as an advanced profile for cumulative governance. An agent carries the latest signed state voucher; each enforcer verifies the current voucher, updates the state, signs a new proof, and later enforcers verify signature continuity, ordering, and freshness to resist replay. 

8.5.3.1 Freshness and Monotonicity Invariant To resist replay in asynchronous environments, veri-fiable state proofs must preserve both freshness and monotonicity. A conformant StateVoucher therefore carries three elements: a monotonic sequence value, a signed timestamp, and a signature chain linking the current voucher to previously accepted state transitions. These three elements serve distinct but complementary purposes. The monotonic sequence value protects ordering and prevents rollback or replay of older vouchers. The timestamp, interpreted at the granularity defined by the applicable profile, allows the evaluator to test freshness within a bounded drift window. UTC normalization, or an equivalently unambiguous time representation, prevents ambiguity arising from local time-zone conventions, daylight saving time transitions, or inconsistent clock formats across domains. An enforcer’s evaluation of the CumulativeLimitConstraint in Section 8.5.2 is valid only if three conditions hold. First, sequential continuity : the presented sequence value must extend the accepted voucher chain monotonically and must not duplicate or roll back a previously accepted state. Any reused, duplicated, or lower sequence value must be denied. Second, temporal proximity : the voucher timestamp must fall 39 within the maximum drift envelope Δ𝑡 defined by the active industry profile. Its purpose is bounded freshness validation, not mere calendrical description. The applicable profile should also define the required timestamp granularity, such as seconds or milliseconds, based on deployment sensitivity. If the voucher age exceeds Δ𝑡 ,the evaluator must fail closed and return a typed denial reason indicating stale state. Third, authority continuity : the voucher must carry a valid signature from a prior enforcer or state authority recognized by the relevant trust registry and permitted for that profile. This prevents acceptance of vouchers signed by unauthorized intermediaries. Together, these conditions allow verifiable state proofs to preserve replay resistance and continuity of state without requiring a permanently online shared state authority. Recovery or reconciliation after failure may be handled through external governance mechanisms, but the authorization decision for the current interaction remains deny. 

8.5.4 Epoch-Based Distributed Quotas A more scalable pattern for distributed environments is epoch-based quota allocation. Rather than querying or updating a global state authority on every request, the issuer pre-allocates bounded spending windows (for example, daily or hourly sub-limits) to individual enforcers or execution clusters. Each enforcer then operates without synchronous cross-cluster coordination on each request until the current epoch ends, at which point quotas are refreshed. This preserves the high-throughput, low-latency properties of the core model while reducing coordination overhead. It does introduce bounded temporary over-allocation risk if multiple enforcers are given quota slices simultaneously, but that risk is explicit, modeled, and operationally governable. Like verifiable state proofs, epoch-based quotas are best treated as a deployment profile layered on top of the stateless core rather than as a mandatory requirement of the standard. 

8.5.5 Enforcement Tiers and Availability Tradeoffs Enterprises may configure enforcement engines to apply different tiers of stateful validation based on the risk profile of the transaction. A stateless tier is appropriate for lower-risk actions and relies only on per-action evaluation. It maximizes portability and availability but does not address cumulative exposure. An epoch-bound tier applies local quota enforcement with periodic synchronization. It provides stronger macro-governance while retaining acceptable performance for many operational settings. A synchronous tier requires real-time verification against the authoritative state source for every high-risk action. It offers the strongest control but at the cost of availability and latency. By standardizing how the enforcement engine interacts with the relevant state source, the model preserves its portable core while supporting the stronger governance required for high-risk autonomous coordination. 

8.6 Empirical Validation and Reference Implementation 

This paper presents the authorization semantic model as a formal specification with pseudocode evaluation procedures. Empirical validation remains future work. In particular, three areas require implementation experience before standardization. 

Reference implementation. A minimal open-source enforcement engine implementing the canonical processing pipeline in Section 7.11, semantic resolution in Section 7.12.5, and delegation-chain verification would allow independent parties to test interoperability claims against concrete artifacts rather than prose descriptions alone. 

Performance characterization. Constraint evaluation over the four core types is designed to be local and O(n) in the number of constraints, but real-world overhead depends on container parsing, signature verification, governance-manifest fetching, and, for stateful tiers, state-authority round trips. Benchmarking these stages across JWT/JWS and VC containers under representative workloads would quantify the latency budget and inform deployment guidance. 

Conformance test vectors. The worked trace in Section 7.11.1 demonstrates one allow path and one deny path. A conformance suite should cover every denial reason enumerated in the pseudocode, 40 including issuer_untrusted , audience_mismatch , delegation_widened , constraint_unknown , and 

context_field_missing , to verify that independent implementations converge on identical decisions for the same inputs. These artifacts are natural companion deliverables alongside the standardization path described in Section 9. 

# 9. Toward a Standard 

The authorization semantic model described in Section 7 is intended to serve as the foundation for a formal standard. A practical standardization path should distinguish among a normative core, profile bindings, governed vocabularies, mapping profiles, and optional advanced governance profiles. This separation keeps the core portable and testable while allowing container-specific, industry-specific, and stateful extensions to evolve without fragmenting the model. No single standards body needs to own every layer. A practical path would likely split the work across venues according to their strengths: IETF-style work for compact signed artifacts, JWT/JWS bindings, proof-of-possession, and well-known discovery mechanics; the OpenID Foundation, particularly adjacent to AuthZEN-style authorization interoperability, for authorization API and PDP/PEP integration profiles; the W3C Verifiable Credentials ecosystem for VC packaging and credential-status alignment; and industry consortia or regulated-sector governance bodies for vertical vocabularies such as insurance, financial services, healthcare, or aerospace supply-chain profiles. The important point is not institutional exclusivity, but artifact separation: each layer should be independently versioned, testable, and adoptable. 

9.1 Normative Core 

The normative core should define the authorization payload structure, mandatory payload components, the core constraint types and their evaluation and attenuation semantics, the conjunctive total fail-closed evaluation model, canonical typing and mapping rules, the most-restrictive-wins merge rule, delegation-chain verification, and signed audit-record requirements. Two conformant implementations, given the same signed authorization, request context, applicable profile and vocabulary versions, and canonical typing and mapping rules, should produce the same authorization decision. This implies the need for a conformance test suite containing machine-readable test vectors that cover successful authorization, failure cases for each constraint type, fail-closed behavior on unknown con-straints, missing context fields, local-policy restriction, delegation attenuation, revocation, expiration, issuer trust verification, proof of possession, subject binding, and audience binding. 

9.2 Profile Bindings 

Profile bindings should specify how the authorization payload maps into a particular credential container and associated trust model. A JWT profile [1] binding would map agent identity, issuer identity, permissions, structured constraints, audience binding, and proof-of-possession requirements into claims and associated validation rules. A W3C Verifiable Credential profile [7] binding would map the same semantic components into VC structures, proof methods, and status mechanisms. An OAuth Rich Authorization Requests profile [3] could similarly carry the authorization payload through the authorization_details structure. Work on a Cedar profile for OAuth Rich Authorization Requests [27] illustrates this direction by defining a way to distribute Cedar policy sets through authorization_details .In the architecture proposed here, such work is best understood as a concrete profile binding: OAuth RAR provides the container and exchange surface, while Cedar provides one possible policy-language serialization and enforcement substrate. The portable authorization semantics, Minimum Viable Vocabulary, attenuation rules, governed mapping behavior, audit requirements, and conformance expectations remain part of the common semantic layer that a profile binding must preserve. 41 The critical requirement is that different bindings preserve the same authorization meaning. Profile choice may change serialization, trust bootstrapping, and revocation method, but it must not alter the authorization decision when the same signed authority, request context, and applicable vocabulary semantics are presented to a conformant evaluator. 

9.3 Governed Vocabularies and Mapping Profiles 

Governed vocabularies should define permission namespaces, resource and action naming conventions, re-quired context fields, field types, and approved aliases for a specific industry or use case. The Minimum Viable Vocabulary provides the shared semantic substrate for portable authorization, while domain profiles extend that substrate under explicit governance and versioning. Mapping profiles are equally important. They define how local request structures resolve to shared semantic identifiers and which type-safe coercions are permitted. These mappings are not ad hoc runtime inference; they are governed artifacts that enable semantic portability across heterogeneous systems. Signed discovery metadata, such as the receiver governance manifest described in Section 7.13, may publish accepted vocab-ularies, profile versions, trust anchors, and required context fields in advance, in order to reduce integration brittleness while preserving authoritative receiver-side enforcement. Stateful governance extensions such as cumulative limits, epoch-bound quotas, and verifiable state proofs should be treated as optional advanced profiles layered on top of the normative core rather than as mandatory features for every conformant implementation. 

9.4 Conformance and Interoperability 

A conformance program should include at least four layers. 

Level 1 Evaluation Conformance: The implementation correctly evaluates the core constraint types, applies conjunctive total fail-closed logic, and produces the expected decisions for the normative test vectors. 

Level 2 Semantic Conformance: The implementation correctly recognizes the Minimum Viable Vocab-ulary, applies governed mapping profiles, enforces type-safe resolution, and fails closed on ambiguous, stale, conflicting, or invalid semantic mappings. 

Level 3 Profile Conformance: The implementation correctly serializes and deserializes authorization payloads in at least one supported profile and preserves semantic equivalence across encodings. 

Level 4 Delegation Conformance: The implementation correctly verifies delegation chains, enforces attenuation for all supported constraint types, rejects widened delegations, and handles revocation propaga-tion. 

9.5 Concrete Work-Item Structure 

A standards effort could be decomposed into a small number of concrete work items rather than attempted as one large omnibus specification. Work Item Purpose Likely Home Core Authorization Semantics Defines the payload model, MVV, constraint algebra, evaluation semantics, attenuation rules, audit record, and conformance vectors IETF-style standards track or comparable cross-vendor venue JWT/JWS Profile Defines compact enterprise-friendly serialization, claims, audience binding, proof-of-possession, revocation hooks, and validation rules IETF or OpenID Foundation 42 Work Item Purpose Likely Home Verifiable Credential Profile Defines VC representation, proof method expectations, status integration, and semantic equivalence with the core payload W3C Verifiable Credentials ecosystem Governance Manifest Profile Defines /.well-known/agent-governance , signed manifest structure, cache semantics, profile references, and compatibility metadata IETF or OpenID Foundation Vocabulary and Mapping Profile Registry Defines MVV registry rules, profile identifiers, versioning metadata, alias rules, and machine-readable mapping profile format Shared registry with industry-governed extensions Insurance Profile Defines claim, settlement, recipient, policy, and fraud-review vocabularies for the insurance use case Insurance industry consortium or profile working group Supply-Chain Evidence Profile Defines part, shipment, attestation, provenance, evidence disclosure, and recipient-role vocabularies Aerospace, defense, or supply-chain governance body Stateful Governance Profile Defines cumulative limits, state authority pointers, epoch-bound quotas, state vouchers, and freshness invariants Advanced profile after the stateless core is stable Conformance Test Suite Provides executable test vectors for evaluation, semantic resolution, profile bindings, delegation, revocation, and failure cases Cross-venue implementation project This structure allows early adopters to implement a narrow, useful core without waiting for every industry vocabulary or advanced stateful mechanism to mature. 

9.6 Phased Adoption Path 

An adoption path should begin with the stateless core, because it offers the highest interoperability value with the least operational dependency. 

Phase 1: Core and One Container. Define the core payload, MVV, four constraint types, evalua-tion semantics, audit record, and a JWT/JWS profile. Publish basic conformance vectors for allow, deny, expiration, audience mismatch, unknown constraint, missing context, and local-policy restriction. 

Phase 2: Semantic Portability. Standardize the governance manifest, mapping profile format, profile identifiers, and sender-side pre-flight compatibility checks. Add conformance tests for semantic resolution, stale manifests, alias conflicts, type mismatches, and unsupported profile versions. 

Phase 3: Second Container and Early Industry Profiles. Add the VC profile and one or two concrete vertical profiles, such as insurance settlement and supply-chain evidence. At this stage, interoperability testing should show that the same authorization meaning survives across JWT/JWS and VC containers. 43 Phase 4: Delegation and Multi-Agent Workflow. Expand conformance testing for attenuation, delegation-chain verification, revocation propagation, and multi-principal workflow composition. This phase should also define clearer audit requirements for collaborative agent workflows. 

Phase 5: Stateful Governance. Introduce advanced profiles for cumulative limits, epoch-bound quotas, state authority pointers, and verifiable state proofs. This phase should remain optional until the stateless and semantic layers have achieved implementation experience. Taken together, this standardization path preserves a narrow, testable, and portable core while still allowing richer industry semantics, discovery contracts, and stateful governance mechanisms to evolve as profiles. The goal is not to force all agent ecosystems into a single trust architecture or runtime stack, but to define enough shared authorization semantics that autonomous agents can carry bounded authority across organizational boundaries in a way that remains interoperable, auditable, and governable. 

9.7 Outstanding Design Considerations and Future Work 

Several important areas warrant follow-on implementation work and profile development. They do not weaken the normative core proposed here, but they do shape how richer deployments may mature. • Revocation at scale. The paper defines revocation semantically and identifies profile paths, in-cluding Bitstring Status List for VC profiles and TTL, introspection, or issuer-managed revocation for JWT/JWS profiles. Deeper implementation work remains for higher-complexity cases such as multi-hop delegated revocation, offline operation, privacy-preserving status checks, and revocation per-formance under high-volume cross-domain workloads. • Event-driven security signaling. Eventing frameworks such as OpenID Shared Signals Framework (SSF) [25] may complement this model by distributing revocation, compromise, or risk signals in near real time. Such mechanisms are relevant as operational overlays, but they do not replace signed portable authorization credentials or deterministic receiver-side evaluation semantics. • Adjacent agent infrastructure ecosystems. Emerging agent-infrastructure efforts such as AG-NTCY [26] merit further evaluation as adjacent work, particularly where identity, discovery, messaging, and observability are being standardized together. They address a broader stack than the authorization model isolated in this paper, but practical interoperability between those layers remains important. • Stateful governance non-functional requirements. Section 8.5 introduces advanced profiles for cumulative limits, epoch-bound quotas, and verifiable state proofs. Their latency, freshness, replay resistance, coordination cost, and failure-mode implications require reference implementation and de-ployment experience before they can be standardized confidently beyond the current architectural treatment. 

# About the Author 

Partha Madhira is a technology executive and architect focused on enterprise AI systems, agentic architec-tures, digital identity, and authorization models for autonomous systems. His work spans applied AI, cloud architecture, governance, secure enterprise integration, and technical community engagement. 

# References 

Normative References 

[1] M. Jones, J. Bradley, and N. Sakimura, “JSON Web Token (JWT),” RFC 7519, IETF, May 2015. Available: https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7519 [2] D. Hardt, “The OAuth 2.0 Authorization Framework,” RFC 6749, IETF, October 2012. Available: https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc6749 [3] T. Lodderstedt, D. Fett, and J. Schaar, “OAuth 2.0 Rich Authorization Requests,” RFC 9396, IETF, May 2023. Available: https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9396 44 [4] M. Jones, A. Nadalin, B. Campbell, J. Bradley, and C. Mortimore, “OAuth 2.0 Token Exchange,” RFC 8693, IETF, January 2020. Available: https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8693 [5] D. Fett, B. Campbell, J. Bradley, T. Lodderstedt, M. Jones, and D. Waite, “OAuth 2.0 Demonstrat-ing Proof-of-Possession at the Application Layer (DPoP),” RFC 9449, IETF, September 2023. Available: https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9449 [6] M. Jones, N. Sakimura, and J. Bradley, “JSON Web Key (JWK),” RFC 7517, IETF, May 2015. Available: https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7517 [7] World Wide Web Consortium (W3C), “Verifiable Credentials Data Model v2.0,” W3C Recommendation, 2024. Available: https://www.w3.org/TR/vc-data-model-2.0/ [8] M. Nottingham, “Well-Known Uniform Resource Identifiers (URIs),” RFC 8615, IETF, May 2019. Avail-able: https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8615 

Informative References 

[9] J. Cao and C. Arango Gutierrez, “Agent Identity Protocol: Agentic Authentication and Authorized Policy Enforcement,” Internet-Draft draft-aip-agent-identity-protocol-00, IETF, March 2026. Available: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-aip-agent-identity-protocol-00 [10] S. Ramachandran, N. Kothapalli, et al., “Agentic JWT: A Secure Delegation Protocol for Autonomous AI Agents,” arXiv, 2025. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.13603 [11] B. Zelenka et al., “User-Controlled Authorization Network (UCAN) Specification,” Version 1.0.0-rc.1, 2024. Available: https://github.com/ucan-wg/spec [12] Biscuit Auth, “Biscuit Authorization Token: Specification and Documentation,” accessed April 2026. Available: https://www.biscuitsec.org/ [13] OASIS, “eXtensible Access Control Markup Language (XACML) Version 3.0,” OASIS Standard, January 2013. Available: https://www.oasis-open.org/committees/tc_home.php?wg_abbrev=xacml [14] Open Policy Agent, “Policy Language Reference,” accessed April 2026. Available: https://www.openpolicyagent.org/docs/latest/policy-language/ [15] Cedar Policy, “Cedar Policy Language Reference Guide,” accessed April 2026. Available: https://docs.cedarpolicy.com/ [16] R. Pang, R. Caceres, M. Burrows, Z. Chen, P. Dave, N. Germer, A. Golynski, K. Graney, N. Kang, L. Kissner, J. Korn, A. Parmar, C. Richards, and M. Wang, “Zanzibar: Google’s Consistent, Global Authoriza-tion System,” in Proceedings of the 2019 USENIX Annual Technical Conference (USENIX ATC ’19) , 2019. Available: https://www.usenix.org/conference/atc19/presentation/pang [17] Anthropic and contributors, “Authorization - Model Context Protocol,” Model Context Protocol Speci-fication, 2025. Available: https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/2025-06-18/basic/authorization [18] SPIFFE Project, “SPIFFE ID Specification,” accessed April 2026. Available: https://spiffe.io/docs/latest/spiffe-specs/spiffe-id/ [19] Google, “Agent Discovery: The Agent Card,” Agent2Agent (A2A) Protocol Specification, accessed April 2026. Available: https://google-a2a.github.io/A2A/latest/topics/agent-discovery/ [20] Project NANDA, “Project NANDA Repository,” accessed April 2026. Available: https://github.com/projnanda/projnanda [21] OpenID Foundation, “Authorization API 1.0,” OpenID Final Specification, January 2026. Available: https://openid.net/specs/authorization-api-1_0.html [22] R. Iannella and S. Villata, “ODRL Information Model 2.2,” W3C Recommendation, February 2018. Available: https://www.w3.org/TR/odrl-model/ 45 [23] W3C Credentials Community Group, “Authorization Capabilities for Linked Data v0.3,” draft specifi-cation, accessed April 2026. Available: https://w3c-ccg.github.io/zcap-spec/ [24] W3C Credentials Community Group, “Incubation Specifications,” accessed April 2026. Available: https://w3c-ccg.org/specifications/incubation/ [25] OpenID Foundation, “OpenID Shared Signals Framework Specification 1.0,” OpenID Final Specification, August 2025. Available: https://openid.net/specs/openid-sharedsignals-framework-1_0-final.html [26] AGNTCY, “Building infrastructure for the Internet of Agents,” accessed April 2026. Available: https://agntcy.org/ [27] S. Cecchetti, “Cedar Profile for OAuth 2.0 Rich Authorization Requests,” Internet-Draft draft-cecchetti-oauth-rar-cedar-02, IETF, February 2024. Available: https://www.ietf.org/archive/id/draft-cecchetti-oauth-rar-cedar-02.html [28] T. South, S. Marro, T. Hardjono, R. Mahari, C. D. Whitney, D. Greenwood, A. Chan, and A. Pent-land, “Authenticated Delegation and Authorized AI Agents,” arXiv:2501.09674, January 2025. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.09674 46