Title: PrivFusion: A Privacy-preserving Multi-Agent Framework for Harmonizing Distributed Datasets

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.24249v1

Published Time: Tue, 26 May 2026 00:18:54 GMT

Number of Pages: 7

Markdown Content:
# PrivFusion: A Privacy-preserving Multi-Agent Framework for Harmonizing Distributed Datasets 

Anisa Halimi 

IBM Research 

Dublin, Ireland anisa.halimi@ibm.com 

Liubov Nedoshivina 

IBM Research 

Dublin, Ireland liubov.nedoshivina@ibm.com 

Kieran Fraser 

IBM Research 

Dublin, Ireland kieran.fraser@ibm.com 

Stefano Braghin 

IBM Research 

Dublin, Ireland stefanob@ie.ibm.com 

Abstract —The growing availability of clinical data has in-creased the use of machine learning, yet centralized data aggrega-tion is often infeasible for sensitive health information. Federated Learning (FL) offers a distributed alternative, but its adoption is limited by substantial heterogeneity across institutional datasets, making harmonization a critical but frequently overlooked pre-requisite for multi-site analytics. We introduce PrivFusion, a privacy-preserving multi-agent framework that automates the harmonization of structured datasets prior to federated training. PrivFusion uses agents to analyze local data, cluster semantically similar features across sites, and provide iterative transformation recommendations until alignment is achieved. Evaluation across four heterogeneous COVID-19 datasets demonstrates that Priv-Fusion effectively and efficiently harmonizes multi-site data while substantially reducing manual effort. 

Index Terms —Federated Learning, Data Harmonization, Multi-Agent Systems, Ontology-Based Data Integration 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

The volume and complexity of data generated across clin-ical, biomedical, and public health settings continue to grow rapidly. This has led to the adoption of Machine Learning (ML) methods for tasks such as risk prediction, phenotyping, and cohort discovery [1]. However, traditional ML pipelines typically rely on centralized data aggregation, which is often infeasible for sensitive information such as electronic health records or financial data due to privacy, security, and gov-ernance constraints. As a result, many healthcare institutions remain unable or unwilling to share raw data, limiting oppor-tunities for large-scale, multi-site analytics. Federated learning (FL) has emerged as an alternative that enables collaborative model training across institutions while keeping data on-premises [2]. Although FL has demonstrated strong potential in various areas, deploying FL in the real world remains challenging. A central barrier is the data het-erogeneity across institutions. Clinical datasets often differ in feature definitions, coding systems, granularity, measurement practices, and data quality. Before any distributed analysis can be performed, these datasets must be harmonized – a labor-intensive process that requires aligning variables, resolving se-mantic inconsistencies, and standardizing representations [3]. Yet, most FL methodologies implicitly assume that harmoniza-tion has been completed prior to model training, an assumption that is not realistic. As a result, this has become a major bottleneck, delaying or limiting the scalability of federated studies. To mitigate these challenges, several studies have explored ontology-driven and semantic techniques for data harmoniza-tion [4]–[6]. While these approaches alleviate aspects of data heterogeneity, they often require some degree of centralization or rely on predefined common formalisms and mappings, which can be difficult to establish across institutions with differing workflows and data models. These limitations under-score the need for automated, scalable, and privacy-preserving harmonization methods that operate in distributed environ-ments without centralizing sensitive data. Such capabilities would substantially reduce the manual burden on participating institutions, broaden access to collaborative analytics, and ultimately improve the generalizability of resulting models. To address this gap, we introduce PrivFusion 1, a privacy-preserving multi-agent framework designed to harmonize structured datasets across institutions prior to federated model training. In PrivFusion, each participating site, researcher ,first performs a local analysis of its dataset using a suite of agents that extract data types, generate dataset and feature-level descriptions, infer relationships among features, and generate a small set of synthetic samples. Sites then share this metadata with a central server, aggregator . The server uses the received metadata to cluster semantically related fea-tures across datasets and, based on these clusters, invokes an additional agent to generate harmonization recommendations for each site. These recommendations specify which features require transformation and the target representations needed for alignment. Each site applies the proposed transformations locally, after which the updated metadata are resent to the server. This iterative process continues until no additional transformations are required. We evaluate PrivFusion on four real-world COVID-19 datasets originating from different coun-tries and find that it typically achieves harmonization within 2–3 iterations across dataset pairs, even when varying the underlying Large Language Model (LLM). We further observe a consistent increase in feature-name similarity over successive iterations, indicating progressive convergence of the schemas. II. S YSTEM AND THREAT MODELS 

In this section, we introduce our system and threat models.     

> 1Our code is available at https://github.com/IBM/PrivFusion
> arXiv:2605.24249v1 [cs.LG] 22 May 2026 Researcher 𝑖
> Researcher 𝑗
> Dataset Analyzer
> Generating
> Transformations
> Clustering Features
> Dataset Analyzer
> Dataset
> Description
> Feature Data Types Semantic Feature
> Descriptions
> Synthetic Data
> Generator Relevant Topics
> Feature
> Relationships
> Server (S)
> Transformations
> Recommendations
> 𝑀 𝑖
> 𝑀 𝑗
> Applying
> Transformations
> Applying
> Transformations

Fig. 1: An overview of PrivFusion. 

System model. We consider a system that includes two parties: (i) two or more researchers, and (ii) a server. The researchers’ goal is to collaboratively train a medical diagnostic model with high-quality data. For that, they need to ensure that their data is harmonized in a privacy-preserving way. All computations are outsourced to the server. To harmonize the features across the datasets, each researcher provides some metadata, as will be discussed in Section III, to the server. Using the received metadata, the server determines for each dataset which features require transformations and the target representation, and sends these recommendations to each researcher. The researchers transform their datasets using the received recommendations and conduct their desired study. 

Threat model. We assume honest researchers with legitimate research datasets in an honest-but-curious setting, where the server follows the protocol, but it might leverage shared data and metadata to infer sensitive information about the individ-uals represented in the datasets. Some of the known attacks are membership inference [7], [8] and attribute inference attacks [9]. In a membership inference attack, the attacker (the server) aims to determine whether a target individual is part of the dataset or not. In an attribute inference attack, the attacker’s goal is to infer some additional sensitive information about a target individual given the observed ones. III. P ROPOSED FRAMEWORK 

To harmonize the features across different datasets, the proposed approach requires researchers to share information about their respective datasets and samples with the server in a privacy-preserving manner. The researchers’ goal is to provide metadata useful for determining the required dataset transformations. At the same time, they want to ensure that the metadata does not increase the baseline privacy risk of sharing aggregate statistics about the dataset. Let S denote the server, Di represent the original dataset of researcher Ri, and 

M i the metadata that each researcher sends to the server. In the following, we describe the different steps of the proposed framework, shown in Figure 1. 

Dataset Analyzer. Initially, each researcher locally extracts the feature data types (e.g., string, numeric, floating point single precision, etc.) for their dataset. Moreover, each feature is associated with a semantic type using advanced data classifi-cation techniques [10], [11] and by mapping against semantic concepts within a selected general purpose ontology. In the following, we leverage DBPedia as our reference ontology. After that, the researchers use an agent AD to generate a description of the dataset. Given the dataset description and feature data types, each researcher uses another agent, AF ,to obtain a semantic description of the features. In addition, each researcher uses an agent AT to extract a list of relevant topics represented in their dataset Di. To identify feature dependencies, they use an agent AR that infers relationships between the features. Finally, each researcher generates n

synthetic samples, low-utility preserving samples, which will mainly guide the server on harmonizing the features across datasets in the next steps. The researchers’ goal is to generate synthetic samples that maintain the format of the features in their respective datasets and whose values are within the do-main. Note that, to generate synthetic samples, the researchers can use any of the SOTA Differential Privacy (DP) approaches. At the end of this stage, each researcher generates ametadata M i consisting of (i) a description of the dataset, (ii) feature names and data types, (iii) semantic descriptions of individual features, (iv) a list of dataset topics, and (v) inferred relationships among features. In addition to these, each researcher shares n synthetically generated samples. Each researcher, Ri, sends their prepared metadata, M i, to the server S, which determines which features need to be trans-formed and their granularity, and then sends this information back to the researchers. 

Clustering Features. By examining the metadata M i (specifi-cally, feature names, data types, and semantic types), the server clusters the features across the datasets, grouping those that are semantically similar or related and are likely candidates for merging into a single feature. This is achieved through an agent AC , which clusters features that share similar semantics and are candidates for consolidation. The agent outputs a set of clusters C where each cluster Cj consists of a cluster identifier, feature name, and its dataset name. Features within the same cluster share a cluster ID, indicating potential alignment across datasets. Thus, clusters contain one or more features. 

Transformations Recommender. Given the clusters obtained in the previous step and the metadata M i provided by each researcher – especially, the dataset description, the features semantic type (i.e., DBpedia URIs) and semantic descriptions, the feature relationships, and the synthetic samples – the server invokes another agent AH to determine which features within each dataset should be combined, removed, or modified. For each cluster, AH compares the DBpedia URIs and semantic feature descriptions to converge on a representative DBpedia URI that best reflects the shared concept across datasets, while preserving an appropriate level of granularity. The outcome is a set of transformation recommendations for each researcher, specifying which features require modification and the target representation that the server S sends to the respective parties. 

Applying Transformations. Upon receiving the transformation instructions, each researcher Ri applies the recommended transformations to their dataset. Researchers can implement these transformations directly using Python scripts or lever-age a code generation LLM MC to automatically produce the transformation functions. Once the transformations are applied, all participating datasets are harmonized to a common semantic and structural format. This alignment enables collab-orative development and training of high-quality diagnostic models across institutions. These steps are repeated until the server does not suggest further transformations or the maximum number of iterations T is reached. IV. E VALUATION 

Our evaluation of PrivFusion focuses on two key aspects: (i) the number of iterations required to reach convergence and (ii) the number of feature-level transformations recommended dur-ing the harmonization process. We measure feature similarity between datasets at each iteration to showcase harmonization progress and examine how the choice of the underlying LLM influences these outcomes. 

Datasets. We use four publicly available COVID-19 datasets: (i) COVID-19 Indonesia 2 (IDN), (ii) COVID-19 Afghanistan 3(AFG), (iii) COVID-19 Italy 4(IT), and (iv) COVID-19 US 5(US). Each dataset contains information about COVID-19 cases in the specified country (e.g., the total num-ber of coronavirus cases on a given date in a given location). These datasets share some features in different representations, such as date, ISO code, location, etc. Note that we removed some of the unique features from the AFG and IDN datasets in order to focus the analysis on features that may be aligned. 

Date. All four datasets include a date feature, but use dif-ferent formats. IDN records dates as mm/dd/yyyy (Date ), while AFG and US use the format yyyy-mm-dd (date ). IT provides the most detailed representation, following the ISO-8601 timestamp format YYYY-MM-DDTHH:MM:SS (date ). 

Location. Location granularity and encoding differ widely. US reports county and state level identifiers. IDN uses ISO codes (Location ISO Code ) and province-level labels (Location ). AFG describes location using 3 features iso_code , continent ,and location . IT offers the finest granularity including 

Country , RegionCode , RegionName , ProvinceName ,

ProvinceAbbreviation , Lattitude , Longitude .

Case counts. All datasets report the total number of COVID-19 cases, but under different feature names: TotalPositiveCases (Italy), cases (US), 

total_cases (Afghanistan), Total Cases (Indonesia). Table I shows a snapshot of synthetic samples generated from each dataset. A brief inspection of these samples reveals that, despite having several conceptually aligned features, har-monizing them requires substantial pre-processing. Aligning semantically equivalent columns ranges from simple opera-tions, such as standardizing feature names (e.g., converting 

Date to date ), to more complex tasks, such as aggregating multiple location-related features and selecting a consistent level of granularity (e.g., reducing province-level information 

> 2https://www.kaggle.com/dsv/4214699
> 3https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/georgesaavedra/covid19-dataset
> 4https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/sudalairajkumar/covid19-in-italy
> 5https://www.kaggle.com/dsv/13711559

to the country level). These challenges underscore the need for a reasoning-driven alignment process capable of interpreting semantic meaning rather than relying solely on string matching or manual rules. Moreover, discrepancies in representation for-mats, such as ISO codes or GPS coordinates, require dataset-specific transformations that must be consistently applied across sites to enable meaningful harmonization. 

Models. Each agent in PrivFusion can either rely on ashared large language model (LLM) or use specialized LLMs tailored to its specific task (e.g., use a coding LLM for the code generation of transformations). In our ex-periments, we evaluate GPT-OSS-120b [12]( GPT-120b )and llama-3-3-70b-instruct (Llama-70b ) [13] for dataset analysis, clustering features, and recommending transformations. For code generation, we evaluate the general-purpose GPT-120b and a code generation LLM 

deepseek-coder-33b-instruct (DSC-33b ) [14]. 

Results. We evaluate the performance of PrivFusion using multiple combinations of the four datasets. To quantify the alignment efficiency, we use three metrics: (i) the total # of iterations needed for convergence, (ii) the total # of trans-formations recommended during the process, and (iii) the # of common features – defined as features sharing the same name and DBpedia URI – after harmonization. The maximum number of iterations is capped at T = 20 . We first construct all possible combinations, yielding 11 dataset combinations, and focus our analysis on a subset of these. Table II shows an example of the harmonized output for the AFG+IDN pair (using GPT-120b for all alignment steps). Compared with the original schema (shown in Table I), PrivFusion consistently standardized the feature names to snake case, harmonized ISO codes, and aligned date formats to match the COVID-19 In-donesia convention (see Listing 1 for an example). The frame-work preserved dataset-specific attributes when appropriate, for instance, retaining population_density from AFG, while removing features that could not be consistently represented across datasets, such as Location from IDN, which lacked a viable counterpart in AFG. Listing 1: Example of GPT-120b feature transformation.                          

> import pandas as pd
> def transform_date(value): """ Convert a date string (e.g., ’3/28/2020’) into ISO-8601 format ’YYYY-MM-DD’. Returns the formatted string, or the original value if parsing fails. """
> try :
> #pandas can parse many date formats
> if pd.isna(value):
> return value
> return pd.to_datetime(value).strftime(’%Y-%m-%d’)
> except Exception:
> return value

The results of all conducted experiments are summarized in Table III, which also shows that the number of aligned features can vary across model configurations for the same dataset combination. For instance, in the IDN-AFG pair, the number of aligned features ranges from 4 to 5 depending on the TABLE I: Synthetic samples generated from COVID-19 datasets for Afghanistan, Indonesia, Italy, and US.                     

> iso_code continent location date total_cases population_density AFG Asia Afghanistan 2020-02-24 5.0 54.422 AFG Asia Afghanistan 2020-02-25 5.0 54.422 AFG Asia Afghanistan 2020-02-26 5.0 54.422

(a) COVID-19 Afghanistan                     

> Date Location ISO Code Location Total Cases Country Continent 3/1/2020 ID-JK DKI Jakarta 39 Indonesia Asia 3/2/2020 ID-JK DKI Jakarta 41 Indonesia Asia 3/2/2020 IDN Indonesia 2Indonesia Asia

(b) COVID-19 Indonesia                                     

> Date Country RegionCode RegionName ProvinceCode ProvinceName ProvinceAbbreviation Latitude Longitude TotalPositiveCases 2020-02-24T18:00:00 ITA 13 Abruzzo 66 L’Aquila AQ 42.35122196 13.39843823 02020-02-24T18:00:00 ITA 13 Abruzzo 67 Teramo TE 42.6589177 13.70439971 02020-02-24T18:00:00 ITA 13 Abruzzo 68 Pescara PE 42.46458398 14.21364822 0

(c) COVID-19 Italy                     

> date county state fips cases deaths 2020-01-21 Snohomish Washington 53061.0 10.0 2020-01-22 Snohomish Washington 53061.0 10.0 2020-01-23 Snohomish Washington 53061.0 10.0

(d) COVID-19 US 

TABLE II: Example of AFG and IDN from gpt_all .                    

> iso_code date country continent total_cases population_density AFG 2020-02-24 Afghanistan Asia 5.0 54.422 AFG 2020-02-25 Afghanistan Asia 5.0 54.422 AFG 2020-02-26 Afghanistan Asia 5.0 54.422

(a) COVID-19 Afghanistan             

> iso_code date continent total_cases IDN 2020-03-01 Asia 39 IDN 2020-03-02 Asia 41 IDN 2020-03-02 Asia 2

(b) COVID-19 Indonesia 

underlying LLM. This variability becomes more obvious in the AFG-IDN-IT triplet, where configurations using Llama-70b 

result in only 1-2 common features. When moving from pairwise to multi-party harmonization, the number of required transformations increases by 10x, highlighting the growing complexity of aligning heterogeneous schemas. The triplet and all-datasets combinations are particularly demanding, re-quiring 49 and 78 transformations, respectively, showing that multi-party harmonization scales non-linearly in complexity. To assess the degree of alignment, we compute the Jaccard Similarity (JS) [15] between feature names at each iteration. This metric quantifies the proportion of shared features (those with matching names and formats) relative to the total # of unique features across the two datasets. Figure 2 shows the JS increasing with each iteration for all models and dataset combinations. Across all subplots, most configurations reach their peak JS within 3–6 iterations, indicating quick stabiliza-tion. Most improvements occur in the first 2–4 iterations, after which curves flatten, highlighting the importance of early itera-tions. gpt_all and gpt_all_ds_code typically stabilize around JS ∈ (0 .4, 0.6) , which is significantly lower than LLaMA-based results. We noticed that Llama-70b tends to introduce new features, i.e., Disease and fill it with COVID-19 , which 

(a) IDN + AFG (b) IDN + IT 

(c) AFG + IT + IDN (d) IT + IDN + AFG + US 

Fig. 2: Jaccard Similarity wrt iterations # for different LLMs. explains the higher JS scores for LLaMA combinations. As part of its design, PrivFusion is instructed to preserve dataset-specific features when they can not be generated, inferred, or reliably aligned across sites. This behavior ex-plains the lower scores observed in some model combina-tions, where agents were unable to cluster or map certain features due to their uniqueness. Conversely, for the AFG+IDN pair, in the afg_ind_llama_all_gpt_code configuration, where 

Llama-70b was used for all stages except code generation, the framework proposed a transformation that removed the 

population_density feature from AFG due to its uniqueness in the dataset (see Table I for a snapshot of the dataset). V. D ISCUSSION 

Impact of LLMs. Our evaluation revealed distinct perfor-mance characteristics across the tested LLMs. For example, GPT-120b demonstrated superior instruction adherence while TABLE III: The total number of iterations and transformations applied to harmonize the datasets across various LLMs.                                                                                                                                                                   

> Parties Experiment Clust. Feat. ACTrans. Rec. AHCode Gen. MCDataset Analyzer AD,AF,AT,AR# Iter. # Trans. # Feat. gpt_all GPT-120b GPT-120b GPT-120b GPT-120b 254
> gpt_all_ds_code GPT-120b GPT-120b DSC-33b GPT-120b 11 22 4
> IDN ,AFG gpt_all_llama_da GPT-120b GPT-120b GPT-120b Llama-70b 15 22 5
> gpt_norm_code_llama_clu_da Llama-70b GPT-120b GPT-120b Llama-70b 385
> llama_all_gpt_code Llama-70b Llama-70b GPT-120b Llama-70b 314 5
> gpt_all GPT-120b GPT-120b GPT-120b GPT-120b 473
> gpt_all_ds_code GPT-120b GPT-120b DSC-33b GPT-120b 824 3
> IDN ,IT gpt_all_llama_da GPT-120b GPT-120b GPT-120b Llama-70b 10 27 2
> gpt_norm_code_llama_clu_da Llama-70b GPT-120b GPT-120b Llama-70b 263
> llama_all_gpt_code Llama-70b Llama-70b GPT-120b Llama-70b 19 38 4
> gpt_all GPT-120b GPT-120b GPT-120b GPT-120b 12 32 3
> gpt_all_ds_code GPT-120b GPT-120b DSC-33b GPT-120b 12 61 2
> AFG ,IDN ,IT gpt_all_llama_da GPT-120b GPT-120b GPT-120b Llama-70b 415 3
> gpt_norm_code_llama_clu_da Llama-70b GPT-120b GPT-120b Llama-70b 18 35 4
> llama_all_gpt_code Llama-70b Llama-70b GPT-120b Llama-70b 20 49 1
> gpt_all GPT-120b GPT-120b GPT-120b GPT-120b 20 78 1
> gpt_all_ds_code GPT-120b GPT-120b DSC-33b GPT-120b 531 2
> ALL gpt_all_llama_da GPT-120b GPT-120b GPT-120b Llama-70b 318 2
> gpt_norm_code_llama_clu_da Llama-70b GPT-120b GPT-120b Llama-70b 215 1
> llama_all_gpt_code Llama-70b Llama-70b GPT-120b Llama-70b 422 3

maintaining creativity, often recognizing when further iter-ations were unnecessary, even in independent optimization cycles. The experiment referenced as gpt_all required fewer iterations and transformations, favoring incremental updates over introducing new features. In contrast, LLaMA exhibited higher creativity but occasionally misapplied normalization steps or introduced unnecessary changes (e.g., renaming fea-tures or altering string cases). While LLaMA performed well in data analysis tasks, it struggled in determining when the har-monization process should terminate. DeepSeek consistently followed instructions and produced correct code. However, it more frequently generated incomplete responses requiring manual completion (e.g., placeholder lists with comments). Both GPT-120b and DeepSeek occasionally violated coding guidelines by prematurely replacing values with None before attempting transformations. Finally, combining LLaMA with DeepSeek proved ineffective, causing persistent errors and non-convergence within T = 20 iterations. 

Privacy Analysis of PrivFusion. Under the threat model (Section II), we assume an honest-but-curious setting in which the server and participating researchers follow the prescribed protocol, and no parties collude to extract additional informa-tion about any specific participant. Within this context, we can analyze the steps executed by PrivFusion and conclude that no unintended information is leaked. Each participant shares only high-level “structural metadata” (data types, semantic feature descriptions) and a small set of synthetic samples. Researchers fully control synthetic sample generation, and PrivFusion requires only syntactically valid, not statistically faithful, ex-amples. This allows correlation-free generation that lowers re-identification risk [9]. Each researcher receives only the transformation instructions for their own dataset, preventing visibility into others’ data characteristics. While the transfor-mation instructions may reveal the overall level of granularity or formatting chosen during harmonization, this information reflects an aggregate view across datasets rather than any single researcher’s contribution. Because the transformations are produced as a collective abstraction (coordinated by the server), participants cannot reliably attribute specific schema elements or granularity decisions to individual researchers. Overall, by restricting communication to structural metadata and locally generated, low-utility synthetic samples, and by limiting the visibility of transformation recommendations, PrivFusion effectively minimizes cross-site disclosure risks while enabling automated, privacy-preserving harmonization. 

Limitations. While PrivFusion is designed to be adaptable to a wide range of domains, several limitations remain. Its perfor-mance depends on the reasoning consistency of LLM, which may vary across models and tasks. Although the framework encourages preservation of dataset-specific features, LLM-driven harmonization may occasionally over/under-align fea-tures. In clinical settings, incorporating a human-in-the-loop to review and validate the harmonization recommendations would strengthen semantic accuracy and reliability. Addition-ally, PrivFusion typically converged in our experiments, but lacks theoretical guarantees on iteration count. Finally, the multi-agent workflow can be computationally intensive and may not be feasible for resource-constrained institutions. VI. R ELATED WORK 

We review two primary lines of related research: (i) data harmonization and (ii)federated and distributed health analyt-ics. 

Data Harmonization. Data harmonization has been exten-sively studied across a range of scientific domains, often in field-specific contexts such as genomics, epidemiology, and multi-omics research [3], [16]–[18]. Broadly, harmonization approaches can be classified into retrospective and prospective strategies [19]. Retrospective harmonization aligns datasets that have already been collected, as in the case of harmonizing existing COVID-19 datasets [20]. In contrast, prospective harmonization requires collaborators to agree on standard-ized measures prior to data collection. While powerful, this approach can be challenging to implement because research groups often operate under different scientific aims, or health-care systems [21]. In practice, harmonization efforts often fall along a continuum between these two extremes [22]. Harmo-nization techniques can also be classified by the mechanism used to align heterogeneous data. One strategy is merging, in which a unified taxonomy or ontology is constructed that encompasses all local taxonomies or ontologies. Alternatively, mapping-based methods define alignment rules between on-tologies, enabling interoperability without requiring complete unification. These approaches offer different trade-offs in scal-ability, flexibility, and consistency, depending on the intended analytical use case [19]. 

Federated and Distributed Health Analytics. Several prior works have focused on enabling multi-institutional health analytics and collaborative model development without cen-tralizing sensitive data [23], [24]. Gaye et al. [23] develop DataShield, a framework that enables the co-analysis of individual-level data from several studies without transferring the data across institutions. Similarly, the Personal Health Train (PHT) [24] provides a distributed infrastructure that brings computation to the data rather than the reverse. Evalua-tions on lung cancer datasets (tumor staging and post-treatment survival information) have shown the effectiveness of PHT. More recent works in FL have explored how to improve model performance under heterogeneous client data distributions. Personalized FL approaches aim to tailor global models to local client needs [25]. Per-FedAvg [26] uses a meta-learning strategy to learn an initial shared model, which clients can rapidly adapt to their local distribution with only a few gradient updates. Li et al. [27] propose a privacy-preserving method for selecting informative training samples, enabling clients to build more effective models while reducing computation. VII. C ONCLUSION 

In this work, we have proposed PrivFusion, a novel multi-agent framework for harmonizing datasets across sites in a privacy-preserving way. Evaluation on four real-world COVID-19 datasets showed that PrivFusion, particularly when leveraging GPT-OSS as the underlying large language model, effectively harmonized datasets in just a few iterations with a minimal number of required transformations. By enabling automatic alignment of heterogeneous datasets while preserv-ing data privacy, PrivFusion will facilitate high-quality col-laborative research across institutions. In future work, we will explore the application of PrivFusion to additional datasets and domains, as well as the evaluation of alternative large language models to further enhance its scalability and applicability. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

Anisa Halimi and Stefano Braghin were partly supported by the Innovative Health Initiative Joint Undertaking (IHI JU) under grant agreement No. 101172997 – SEARCH. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the agencies funding the research. REFERENCES [1] M. Chen, Y. Hao, K. Hwang, L. Wang, and L. Wang, “Disease prediction by machine learning over big data from healthcare communities,” IEEE access , vol. 5, pp. 8869–8879, 2017. [2] R. S. Antunes, C. André da Costa, A. Küderle, I. A. Yari, and B. Eskofier, “Federated learning for healthcare: Systematic review and architecture proposal,” ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology , vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 1–23, 2022. [3] G. Kumar, S. Basri, A. A. Imam, S. A. Khowaja, L. F. Capretz, and A. O. Balogun, “Data harmonization for heterogeneous datasets: a systematic literature review,” Applied Sciences , vol. 11, no. 17, p. 8275, 2021. [4] K. D. Kourou, V. C. Pezoulas, E. I. Georga, T. P. Exarchos, P. Tsanakas, M. Tsiknakis, T. Varvarigou, S. De Vita, A. Tzioufas, and D. I. Fotiadis, “Cohort harmonization and integrative analysis from a biomedical engi-neering perspective,” IEEE Reviews in Biomedical Engineering , 2018. [5] M. d. Carmen Legaz-García, J. A. Miñarro-Giménez, M. Menárguez-Tortosa, and J. T. Fernández-Breis, “Generation of open biomedical datasets through ontology-driven transformation and integration pro-cesses,” Journal of Biomedical Semantics , vol. 7, no. 1, p. 32, 2016. [6] E. Chondrogiannis, V. Andronikou, E. Karanastasis, and T. Varvarigou, “A novel approach for clinical data harmonization,” in IEEE Interna-tional Conference on Big Data and Smart Computing (BigComp) , 2019. [7] T. Stadler, B. Oprisanu, and C. Troncoso, “Synthetic data–anonymisation groundhog day,” in 31st USENIX Security Symposium , 2022. [8] M. S. M. S. Annamalai, G. Ganev, and E. De Cristofaro, “"what do you want from theory alone?" experimenting with tight auditing of differentially private synthetic data generation,” in 33rd USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security) , pp. 4855–4871, 2024. [9] G. Ganev and E. De Cristofaro, “The inadequacy of similarity-based privacy metrics: Privacy attacks against “truly anonymous” synthetic datasets,” in IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP) , 2025. [10] L. Nedoshivina, A. Halimi, J. Bettencourt-Silva, and S. Braghin, “Pragmatic de-identification of cross-domain unstructured documents: A utility-preserving approach with relation extraction filtering,” AMIA Summits on Translational Science Proceedings , vol. 2024, p. 85, 2024. [11] S. Braghin, J. H. Bettencourt-Silva, K. Levacher, and S. Antonatos, “An extensible de-identification framework for privacy protection of unstruc-tured health information: creating sustainable privacy infrastructures,” in 

MEDINFO: Health and Wellbeing E-networks for All , 2019. [12] S. Agarwal, L. Ahmad, J. Ai, S. Altman, A. Applebaum, E. Arbus, R. K. Arora, Y. Bai, B. Baker, H. Bao, et al. , “gpt-oss-120b & gpt-oss-20b model card,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.10925 , 2025. [13] A. Dubey, A. Jauhri, A. Pandey, A. Kadian, A. Al-Dahle, A. Letman, A. Mathur, A. Schelten, A. Yang, A. Fan, et al. , “The llama 3 herd of models,” arXiv e-prints , pp. arXiv–2407, 2024. [14] D. Guo, Q. Zhu, D. Yang, Z. Xie, K. Dong, W. Zhang, G. Chen, X. Bi, Y. Wu, Y. Li, et al. , “Deepseek-coder: When the large language model meets programming–the rise of code intelligence,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.14196 , 2024. [15] P. Jaccard, “Étude comparative de la distribution florale dans une portion des alpes et des jura,” Bulletin de la Société Vaudoise des Sciences Naturelles , vol. 37, pp. 547–579, 1901. [16] A. H. Zhu, D. C. Moyer, T. M. Nir, P. M. Thompson, and N. Jahanshad, “Challenges and opportunities in dmri data harmonization,” in Interna-tional Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention , pp. 157–172, Springer, 2019. [17] Y. Chen, S. Sabri, A. Rajabifard, and M. E. Agunbiade, “An ontology-based spatial data harmonisation for urban analytics,” Computers, Envi-ronment and Urban Systems , vol. 72, pp. 177–190, 2018. [18] T. Chen, A. J. Abadi, K.-A. Lê Cao, and S. Tyagi, “multiomics: A user-friendly multi-omics data harmonisation r pipeline,” F1000Research ,vol. 10, no. 538, p. 538, 2023. [19] C. Cheng, L. Messerschmidt, I. Bravo, M. Waldbauer, R. Bhavikatti, C. Schenk, V. Grujic, T. Model, R. Kubinec, and J. Barceló, “A general primer for data harmonization,” Scientific data , vol. 11, p. 152, 2024. [20] G. C. Hurtt, L. P. Chini, S. Frolking, R. Betts, J. Feddema, G. Fischer, J. Fisk, K. Hibbard, R. Houghton, A. Janetos, et al. , “Harmonization of land-use scenarios for the period 1500–2100: 600 years of global gridded annual land-use transitions, wood harvest, and resulting secondary lands,” Climatic Change , vol. 109, no. 1, p. 117, 2011. [21] H. Uphoff, J.-M. Cohen, D. Fleming, and A. Noone, “Harmonisation of national influenza surveillance morbidity data from eiss: a simple index.,” Euro Surveillance: Bulletin Europeen sur les Maladies Trans-missibles= European Communicable Disease Bulletin , 2003. [22] A. Torres-Espín and A. R. Ferguson, “Harmonization-information trade-offs for sharing individual participant data in biomedicine,” Harvard Data Science Review , vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 10–1162, 2022. [23] A. Gaye, Y. Marcon, J. Isaeva, P. LaFlamme, A. Turner, E. M. Jones, J. Minion, A. W. Boyd, C. J. Newby, M.-L. Nuotio, et al. , “Datashield: taking the analysis to the data, not the data to the analysis,” International Journal of Epidemiology , vol. 43, no. 6, pp. 1929–1944, 2014. [24] T. M. Deist, F. J. Dankers, P. Ojha, M. Scott Marshall, T. Janssen, C. Faivre-Finn, P. Lambin, and A. Dekker, “Distributed learning on 20000+ lung cancer patients – the personal health train,” Radiotherapy and Oncology , vol. 144, pp. 189–200, 2020. [25] A. Z. Tan, H. Yu, L. Cui, and Q. Yang, “Towards personalized federated learning,” IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems ,vol. 34, no. 12, pp. 9587–9603, 2022. [26] A. Fallah, A. Mokhtari, and A. Ozdaglar, “Personalized federated learning: A meta-learning approach,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.07948 ,2020. [27] A. Li, L. Zhang, J. Tan, Y. Qin, J. Wang, and X.-Y. Li, “Sample-level data selection for federated learning,” in IEEE INFOCOM-IEEE Conference on Computer Communications , pp. 1–10, IEEE, 2021.