Title: Verifiable Agentic Infrastructure: Proof-Derived Authorization for Sovereign AI Systems

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.15228v1

Published Time: Mon, 18 May 2026 00:01:21 GMT

Number of Pages: 19

Markdown Content:
# Verifiable Agentic Infrastructure: Proof-Derived Authorization for Sovereign AI Systems 

Jun He 

OpenKedge.io 

junhe@openkedge.io 

Deying Yu OpenKedge.io 

deying@openkedge.io 

# Abstract 

Modern cloud and enterprise systems rely on identity-centric authorization, as-suming that callers possessing valid credentials are safe to execute commands. The emergence of autonomous AI agents invalidates this assumption: agents can generate syntactically valid but semantically unsafe actions, making stand-ing privileges a significant operational risk. This risk becomes especially acute in sovereign AI systems, where autonomous agents may interact with cloud infras-tructure, regulated data, financial workflows, and national-scale digital services. Governed mutation substrates reduce this risk by interposing on agent actions: agents submit intents, infrastructure evaluates context and policy, and execution is mediated. However, this shifts the trust boundary: how can the decision to authorize an intent be made verifiable, distributed, and replayable? We introduce a Distributed Trust Framework (DTF), a verification framework for governed mutation systems that computes execution authority from structured, verifiable artifacts. DTF introduces a Justification Proof to encode the admissibil-ity basis of an action, a consensus model for independent evaluation, an ephemeral Execution Identity derived from the approved proof, and an append-only Evidence Chain that preserves the authorization lifecycle. Under stated substrate assump-tions, this architecture enforces a compact authorization invariant: no high-stakes execution without a proof object, no derived authority without consensus, and no valid mutation detached from evidence. We define the model, instantiate it over an OpenKedge-based governed mutation substrate, and show how it maps onto cloud-native environments. By shifting authorization from standing identity to proof-derived authority, DTF provides an infrastructure foundation for making agentic execution governable, auditable, and bounded in sovereign AI deployments. 

# 1 Introduction 

Modern cloud and enterprise systems rely on identity and access management models that assume callers are rational and trustworthy. In these systems, authorization is fundamentally identity-centric: if a service account possesses sufficient permissions, its requested actions are admitted. This model breaks down when applied to autonomous AI agents. Agents generate actions non-deterministically; they can produce API calls that are syntactically valid but semantically unsafe. Granting them broad, standing permissions creates operational risk. OpenKedge addresses part of this risk by reframing agent-driven mutation as an intent-governed process [1]. Instead of mutating state directly, agents submit proposals. The infrastructure evaluates these proposals against context and policy before allowing execution. OpenKedge is the motivating and concrete substrate in this paper, but the verification problem is broader than any single substrate. 

> Preprint.
> arXiv:2605.15228v1 [cs.AI] 13 May 2026

Intent governance leaves a second authorization question: what makes the authorization decision itself verifiable, distributed, and replayable? If the system simply intercepts requests, runs a policy check, and issues a token, it leaves a single point of failure and an unauditable decision gap. What is the stable object that evaluators approve? How is temporary authority derived from the approval record rather than from the caller’s standing role? What must be persisted so that an auditor can later reconstruct why execution authority existed at all? We answer these questions with a Distributed Trust Framework (DTF) for proof-derived execution. DTF is a verification layer for governed mutation substrates: it assumes that a system already in-terposes on mutation attempts, and supplies the authorization semantics needed to make approval proof-bound, consensus-gated, and replayable. It adds four verification constructs: • Justification Proofs , structured artifacts that bind intent, context, policy basis, risk, and execution boundary. • Consensus validation , in which independent evaluators attest to the same proof object under explicit governance rules. • Execution Identity , an ephemeral authority token derived from the approved proof rather than from ambient caller privilege. • Evidence Chains , append-only lifecycle records that preserve proof, attestations, authority, execution, and outcome. DTF has a more specific authorization invariant than ordinary access control: a high-stakes mutation is valid only if its authority can be replayed from recorded proof and approval. In conventional identity and access management, authorization is primarily a property of a principal [2, 3]. In zero-trust systems, that principal and its context are checked continuously [4]. In DTF, the principal is no longer the main object of trust. The decision lifecycle is. The paper keeps mechanisms already covered by OpenKedge brief. Section 3.5 states the boundary precisely: we instantiate DTF over an OpenKedge-based governed mutation substrate while defining a general authorization-verification model for such substrates. Our contributions are: • a proof-derived authority model for governed agentic mutation; • a consensus semantics for independent approval of authorization artifacts; • a definition of Execution Identity as computed, ephemeral authority; • safety and audit properties for proof-bound, consensus-gated, evidence-preserved execu-tion; • a practical cloud mapping that uses existing temporary credential and audit primitives. 

# 2 Related Work 

Access control and zero trust. Role-based and attribute-based access control decide whether a principal may perform an action [2, 3]. Zero-trust architecture improves this model through contin-uous verification of requester and context [4]. DTF shifts the verification target from the requester to the mutation lifecycle: authority is valid only if it is derived from an approved proof. 

Automated Reasoning and Verified Permissions. Modern authorization systems increasingly rely on automated reasoning and formal methods to analyze access invariants. For example, recent frameworks like AWS Cedar encode authorization policies into SMT-solvable formulas to check security properties and use mechanized proofs in Lean to establish properties of the policy engine [5, 6]. These systems primarily reason about policy semantics and static authorization decisions. DTF addresses a complementary problem: it structures the runtime authorization lifecycle of autonomous agents so that transient authority is derived from a recorded proof object, checked by independent evaluators, and bounded under stated substrate assumptions before mutation occurs. 2LLM Agent Safety and Tool-Use Authorization. The adoption of Large Language Models (LLMs) as autonomous agents has exposed security vulnerabilities, including indirect prompt in-jection [7] and the ability of agents to exploit systems when granted unchecked tool access [8]. Re-cent surveys describe the growing architecture of agent tool-use [9]; governing those tools remains unsettled. Early mitigation strategies focused on prompt-level guardrails or strict "human-in-the-loop" approvals for every action. At scale, continuous human oversight becomes a bottleneck. DTF shifts the safety boundary from the prompt to the execution infrastructure. It provides a structured "human-on-the-loop" alternative where independent evaluators—rather than the proposing agent— derive execution authority from structured proof artifacts. 

Distributed trust. Consensus and Byzantine fault-tolerant systems study agreement under faulty participants [10, 11]. We do not run consensus over replicated application state. Instead, we use ex-plicit multi-evaluator agreement to decide whether a proof is sufficient to derive execution authority. 

Provenance and accountability. Provenance, event sourcing, and accountability systems preserve causal history and support replay or audit [12–14]. The DTF Evidence Chain—an append-only lifecycle record introduced earlier—specializes this lineage for authorization-bearing mutations by recording not only effects, but the proof object and approval path that produced authority. 

OpenKedge and Sovereign Agentic Loops. OpenKedge provides the concrete intent-governed mutation substrate used in this paper’s instantiation [1]. The Sovereign Agentic Loops architecture separately develops the decoupling of reasoning from direct execution [15]. DTF is a substrate-agnostic verification layer that formalizes proof construction, consensus-backed approval, and exe-cution identity semantics rather than a replacement for these systems. 

# 3 Distributed Trust Framework 

In traditional architectures, authorization is largely a static property of a principal: an agent or service account acts under a standing role, and requests are granted if they fall within the permissions of that role. This model breaks down when applied to autonomous AI agents. Because an agent’s behavior is non-deterministic and its reasoning is prone to error or manipulation, granting it broad standing authority creates operational risk. DTF is a general verification model for intent-governed mutation systems. It assumes a substrate that already interposes on mutation attempts: agents propose intents, the infrastructure binds context and policy, and execution is mediated rather than direct. Any substrate with this interposition point can adopt DTF’s authorization semantics. OpenKedge is the concrete governed mutation substrate used for the implementation and examples in this paper [1]. Moving from direct execution to intent governance raises a subsequent verification problem. If intent governance simply means a central policy engine says “yes” or “no” and issues an API key, the system still has a single point of failure and an unauditable decision gap. How is the decision to authorize a mutation made verifiable? What is the stable object that evaluators approve? How is authority bounded to the approved intent, and how is the authorization basis reconstructed after the fact? The Distributed Trust Framework provides the verification layer above such governed mutation sub-strates. It models authority not as a standing permission, but as a derived state . A proposed mutation does not execute because an agent or service account already has broad permission. It executes only if a recorded proof is approved by independent evaluators and converted into a bounded execution identity. 

3.1 Model Formulation 

We define the Distributed Trust Framework using a formal state-transition model. Let t denote logical time. 

Sets and Spaces: 

• I: Space of canonical intents. 3• C: Space of authorization-relevant context snapshots. • P: Space of policy bundles. • J : Space of Justification Proofs. • A: Space of attestations. • G: Space of governance metadata. • D = {approve , reject , escalate }: The decision space. • E: Space of Execution Identities. • X , O: Spaces of mutation attempts and observed outcomes, respectively. 

State Variables: At any time t, the system processes an intent It ∈ I against context Ct ∈ C 

and policy Pt ∈ P . This produces a Justification Proof JP t ∈ J , a vector of attestations At ∈ A n

from evaluator set Vt = {v1, . . . , v n}, and a decision Dt ∈ D using metadata Γt ∈ G . A successful decision materializes an Execution Identity EI t ∈ E , leading to an attempt Xt ∈ X and outcome 

Ot ∈ O , durably recorded in an Evidence Chain EC t.

Core Functions: 

• Proof Construction: f : I × C × P → J generates the proof JP t = f (It, C t, P t).• Attestation: vi : J → A generates an independent attestation ati = vi(JP t).• Consensus Rule: q : An × G → D computes the decision Dt = q(At, Γt).• Authority Derivation: h : J × A n × G → E materializes the bounded identity EI t =

h(JP t, A t, Γt) if Dt = approve .

3.2 Execution Pipeline 

The authorization pipeline transforms an intent into a governed execution record. Algorithm 1 gives the ordered path. The central requirement is causal ordering: proof precedes approval, approval precedes authority, and execution is incomplete until evidence is durably recorded. 

Algorithm 1 DTF Authorization and Execution Pipeline 

Input: Intent It, Context Ct, Policy Pt, Evaluator set Vt, Metadata Γt

Output: Evidence Chain EC t 

> 1:

JP t ← f (It, C t, P t) ▷ Construct Justification Proof  

> 2:

for each evaluator vi ∈ Vt do  

> 3:

ati ← vi(JP t) ▷ Generate independent attestations  

> 4:

end for  

> 5:

At ← (at

> 1

, . . . , a tn) 

> 6:

Dt ← q(At, Γt) ▷ Evaluate consensus rule  

> 7:

if Dt = approve then  

> 8:

EI t ← h(JP t, A t, Γt) ▷ Derive bounded Execution Identity  

> 9:

Bt ← Boundary (JP t) 

> 10:

if Scope (EI t) ⪯ Bt then  

> 11:

Xt, O t ← Execute (EI t) 

> 12:

else  

> 13:

Xt, O t ← ∅ , Escalated (Boundary Violation)  

> 14:

end if  

> 15:

else  

> 16:

EI t ← ∅  

> 17:

Xt, O t ← ∅ , Rejected or Escalated  

> 18:

end if  

> 19:

EC t ← (It, C t, P t, JP t, A t, Γt, D t, EI t, X t, O t) 

> 20:

return EC t

43.3 Threat Model and Assumptions 

We assume the autonomous agent proposing intents is untrusted. Its internal reasoning, prompts, and local state may be non-deterministic, hallucinated, or compromised by prompt injection. The Trusted Computing Base (TCB) consists of the DTF verification layer (Justification Engine, Eval-uation Swarm, Execution Broker, Evidence Store) and the underlying governed mutation substrate (e.g., OpenKedge). We assume the TCB is uncompromised and the substrate correctly interposes on execution. The framework defends against rogue or unsafe agent actions, not against total compro-mise of the verification infrastructure itself. 

3.4 System Invariants 

To make governance verifiable, DTF enforces four lifecycle invariants. Let Ωt denote the execution obligations, and Bt = ( μt, ρ t, τ t, Ωt) be the maximum authority boundary derived from the proof. 

Constraint 1: Proof-bound Execution. No governed high-stakes mutation Xt may execute with-out a corresponding valid proof. 

∀Xt̸ = ∅, ∃JP t ∈ J s.t. JP t = f (It, C t, P t)

Constraint 2: Consensus-gated Authority. No valid Execution Identity may be issued unless the consensus explicitly approves the proof. 

EI t̸ = ∅ =⇒ q(At, Γt) = approve 

Constraint 3: Non-escalation. The effective authority scope of EI t, extracted via Scope (·), must be contained within the proof-derived boundary. 

∀EI t̸ = ∅, Scope (EI t) ⪯ Bt

Constraint 4: Evidence Completeness. Every intent proposal, regardless of decision outcome, must map to exactly one structurally complete Evidence Chain. 

∀It ∈ I , |EC t| = 1 where EC t captures (Dt, EI t, X t, O t)

3.5 What this paper adds beyond OpenKedge 

OpenKedge contributes one governed mutation substrate: intent-governed mutation, context-aware policy evaluation, execution contracts and task-oriented identities, and lineage through the Intent-to-Execution Evidence Chain (IEEC) [1]. DTF does not replace that substrate. It is a general authorization-verification layer for governed mutation systems, and OpenKedge is the substrate through which we instantiate and evaluate it. The delta is the object of authorization. OpenKedge governs whether and how an intent may mutate state. DTF defines the stable object that independent evaluators approve ( JP ), the consensus se-mantics over that object ( q(At, Γt)), the proof-derived authority that reaches the execution substrate (EI ), and the authorization lifecycle evidence required for later replay ( EC ). In the OpenKedge in-stantiation, a task-oriented identity becomes an Execution Identity only when its authority is derived from a Justification Proof and consensus record; an IEEC becomes a DTF Evidence Chain only when it preserves proof, attestations, issuance, execution, and outcome as a replayable authorization lifecycle.          

> Concern OpenKedge-based substrate DTF layer in this paper
> Mutation unit Intent-governed mutation proposal Justification Proof as stable autho-rization object Policy path Context-aware policy evaluation Consensus validation semantics over proof attestations Execution authority Contracts and task-oriented identities Proof-derived Execution Identity Lineage IEEC records intent-to-execution lin-eage Evidence Chain records replayable authorization lifecycle

The upper path in Figure 1 is the generic DTF authorization pipeline; the OpenKedge row is one concrete substrate mapping used in this paper. 5Intent Gateway 

Policy Engine (Arbiter) 

Execution Contract 

Execution Substrate 

IEEC (Audit Log) 

Justification Proof JP t

Evaluation Swarm At

Execution Identity EI t

Evidence Chain EC t

construct 

validate approve 

authorize 

> record

maps maps maps 

> Example Substrate (OpenKedge)
> DTF Verification Pipeline

Figure 1: Generic DTF verification pipeline with OpenKedge shown as one substrate mapping. DTF defines proof, evaluator attestations, proof-derived Execution Identity, and Evidence Chain; the OpenKedge row shows the corresponding intent governance, execution contract, task identity, and lineage hooks. 

# 4 Justification Proof 

A Justification Proof ( JP ) is the stable authorization object inspected by evaluators and preserved for replay. It is not a natural-language explanation and not a transcript of the agent’s reasoning. It is a structured decision artifact whose contents are sufficient to determine whether a specific mutation can receive bounded authority. These properties distinguish Justification Proofs from ordinary audit messages or human-readable explanations. Audit messages are typically post-hoc; they record what happened after the fact. Explanations may be persuasive but are often unverifiable. By contrast, a Justification Proof is an authorization artifact whose role is to make the basis and boundary of execution explicit before authority is issued. 

4.1 Structure 

We represent a proof as 

JP t = ( Mt, S t, Πt, R t, B t) ∈ J ,

where Mt is the mutation specification, St the bound state and context snapshot, Πt the policy basis, 

Rt the risk and admissibility assessment, and Bt the maximum execution boundary. Each field has a narrow role: • Mt states what mutation is proposed. • St records the authorization-relevant context used at decision time. • Πt identifies the policies, versions, and constraints applied. • Rt classifies risk and required approval strength. • Bt = ( μt, ρ t, τ t, Ωt) defines the action ( μt), resource ( ρt), time ( τt), and obligation ( Ωt)limits that may be issued if approval succeeds. The proof may reference richer artifacts such as dependency snapshots, simulation results, or model-generated plans, but its authorization-relevant content must be explicit and machine-inspectable. 64.2 Semantics 

A valid JP satisfies three properties. 

Explicitness. Authorization-relevant assumptions must appear in the proof or in referenced im-mutable artifacts. Hidden model state or informal operator memory is not part of the proof. 

Re-evaluability. Given the stored proof, evaluators and auditors can revisit the admissibility judg-ment without reconstructing the proposing agent’s internal reasoning. 

Boundary derivation. The proof determines the maximal authority that could be issued, extracted via the boundary function Boundary :

Boundary (JP t) = Bt.

Approval may narrow this boundary, but issuance may not expand it. 

4.3 Construction 

Proof construction follows four structured steps. Let Normalize , BindContext , EvaluatePolicy , and 

DeriveBoundary be state-transition functions governing intent processing. The construction of JP t

proceeds as follows: 

I′ 

> t

= Normalize (It)

St = BindContext (I′

> t

, C t)(Π t, R t) = EvaluatePolicy (St, P t)

Bt = DeriveBoundary (Π t, R t)

The proof-construction function f from our model is defined as the composition of these steps: 

f (It, C t, P t) ≜ (Mt, S t, Πt, R t, B t) = JP t,

where the normalized intent I′ 

> t

serves as the mutation specification Mt. In the OpenKedge sub-strate, this mirrors the intent-governed pipeline but changes the authorization artifact produced by the pipeline. The output is a durable proof object, not a transient “approve” or “deny” token; inde-pendent validators can agree, disagree, or escalate over the same artifact. 

4.4 Example 

For a proposed TerminateInstance mutation, Mt identifies the action and target instance. St

records relevant topology, traffic, ownership, protection tags, and incident state. Πt identifies poli-cies governing destructive actions and protected resources. Rt may mark the action as critical if the instance is on a dependency path. Bt either permits no issuance or restricts authority to exactly that instance, action, and time window, possibly with an execution-time obligation to re-check traffic. The proof replaces a vague claim such as “the instance appears unused” with a replayable authoriza-tion object. 

# 5 Consensus Validation 

A proof alone is a claim. Consensus validation turns that claim into an authorization decision. DTF does not run full Byzantine consensus over replicated application state; it distributes trust over authorization. The question is whether a proof is sufficient to derive bounded execution authority, and the answer must come from an explicit evaluator set rather than one unchecked component. One evaluator is insufficient because authorization failures are heterogeneous. A policy evaluator may apply the written rule correctly while missing stale topology. A dependency checker may see current state but lack business-risk context. A simulator may model the ordinary case while missing protected-resource policy. A human reviewer may notice operational intent but miss a malformed proof field. Consensus validation is not decorative voting; it prevents any one failure mode from becoming execution authority. 75.1 Evaluator Model 

Each evaluator vi ∈ Vt receives the same JP t and emits an attestation 

ati = vi(JP t) ∈ A ,

where A includes approve , reject , and abstain , plus optional structured objections or obligations. For example, an attestation may be represented as 

ati = ( vi, d ti, ω ti ), dti ∈ { approve , reject , abstain },

where ωti records evaluator-specific annotations such as objections, obligations, or confidence meta-data. Practical deployments should use heterogeneous evaluator classes: • policy evaluators for explicit governance rules; • state evaluators for topology, dependency, and freshness checks; • risk evaluators for blast radius and reversibility; • simulation evaluators for predicted effects; • human-supervised evaluators for elevated or exceptional cases. Heterogeneity matters only if the consensus rule can observe it. DTF records evaluator class, proof hash, decision, objections, and obligations in At, and lets Γt require specific classes, veto rights, quorum thresholds, or escalation on disagreement. 

5.2 Consensus Rule 

The consensus rule encodes quorum thresholds, required evaluator diversity, veto rights, and risk-sensitive escalation. Let A+ and A− denote the sets of approving and rejecting evaluators, respec-tively: 

A+ = {vi ∈ Vt | dti = approve }A− = {vi ∈ Vt | dti = reject }

Let Vveto ⊆ Vt represent the subset of evaluators granted veto authority for the specific mutation class. The governance metadata Γt supplies the risk-adjusted quorum threshold kΓ and rejection threshold rΓ. We define the consensus function q : An × G → D as: 

q(At, Γt) = 



reject if ∃vi ∈ Vveto : dti = reject or |A −| ≥ rΓ

approve if (∄vi ∈ Vveto : dti = reject ) and |A −| < r Γ and |A +| ≥ kΓ

escalate otherwise Higher-risk mutations require stronger quorum limits kΓ, greater evaluator diversity within A+,explicit veto handling, or human review. Equivalently, issuance readiness is the predicate 

Ready (JP t, A t, Γt) ⇐⇒ q(At, Γt) = approve .

Approval means the proof is authorization-ready under recorded inputs. It does not mean the action is globally optimal. The semantics are deliberately limited: DTF requires authority to come through a checked path; it does not claim complete world knowledge. 

5.3 Failure Handling 

Consensus validation rejects or escalates when quorum is missing, required evaluator classes are ab-sent, the proof becomes stale, evaluator outputs are malformed, the derived boundary is ambiguous, or disagreement itself indicates unsafe uncertainty. Disagreement is not treated as an implemen-tation inconvenience; it is a signal about authorization risk. Emergency handling is modeled as a governed break-glass policy, not a bypass: consensus requirements may change, but proof, narrowed identity, evidence, and post-event review remain mandatory. 85.4 Audit Value 

Evaluator disagreement is evidence. DTF therefore preserves all attestations, not only the aggregate decision. Later review can distinguish clear approval, contested approval, rejection, escalation, and malformed evaluation. The record also makes the consensus layer accountable: reviewers can see which failure modes were checked, which objections were raised, and whether the configured rule converted that evidence into the appropriate authorization outcome. 

# 6 Execution Identity 

Execution Identity ( EI ) is the concrete authority produced by an approved proof. It is the main difference between merely deciding that a mutation is allowed and giving the execution substrate an enforceable, proof-derived scope for that mutation. Execution Identity changes the locus of authorization from a durable role to a recorded de-cision. In role-based or attribute-based systems, an agent is assigned an identity (e.g., 

AgentServiceAccount ) and granted broad permissions (e.g., TerminateInstance ). When the agent acts, the system checks if the identity has the permission. This assumes the identity is a stable locus of trust. DTF avoids this assumption. The proposing agent’s identity is metadata for the decision, not the source of authority. Trust is placed in the Justification Proof and its validation. 

6.1 Definition 

If Dt = q(At, Γt) = approve , the system derives 

EI t = h(JP t, A t, Γt) ∈ E .

An EI is ephemeral, non-transferable, and scoped to the proof-derived boundary Bt. It contains or references: • the permitted action class; • the authorized resource set; • temporal validity bounds; • execution-time obligations; • lineage to JP t, At, Γt, and Dt.An EI is not a durable role. It is a per-decision capability whose existence is justified by the recorded proof and approval set. 

6.2 Scope Relation 

Let Scope : E → B map an identity to its effective authority boundary. Valid issuance requires 

Scope (EI t) ⪯ Bt,

where ⪯ is the partial order over boundaries: action classes, resource sets, validity intervals, and obligations must be no broader than those encoded in Bt. The execution broker may further narrow the scope, for example by reducing lifetime or requiring an additional final precondition check. It may not widen the scope beyond the proof boundary. 

6.3 Enforcement 

The execution substrate must admit a governed mutation Xt only when 

Valid (EI t, X t) = 1 .

This predicate checks action, resource, time, and obligations. If the target platform cannot enforce a boundary precisely, the broker must add a mediation layer or refuse issuance for that mutation class. 96.4 Cloud Mapping 

In cloud infrastructure, EI can be implemented using short-lived credentials such as AWS STS ses-sions with restrictive session policies and resource conditions [16]. The credential format is sec-ondary to lineage and containment: the issued authority must be traceable to JP t and incapable of authorizing actions outside Bt.

6.5 Contrast with OpenKedge Task-Oriented Identity 

OpenKedge introduces task-oriented identities as the execution-bound mechanism for approved in-tents [1]. EI gives that mechanism explicit authorization semantics. A task-oriented identity be-comes an Execution Identity when its scope is derived from a Justification Proof, issued only after consensus, and preserved as evidence. 

# 7 Evidence Chain 

The Evidence Chain is the durable record that makes proof-derived authority replayable. Conven-tional audit logs can show that an API call occurred. An Evidence Chain must also show why authority was issued, who or what approved it, what boundary was encoded, and whether execution stayed within that boundary. Logging execution events is insufficient for verifiable infrastructure. If a system logs that an instance was terminated by an agent, an auditor knows what happened, but not why it was authorized. Did the agent hallucinate the context? Did a policy engine fail? Was the mutation escalated to a human who incorrectly approved it? To answer these questions, the system must record the entire authorization lifecycle. The Evidence Chain records that lifecycle. 

7.1 Record 

For each governed mutation attempt, 

EC t = ( It, C t, P t, JP t, A t, Γt, D t, EI t, X t, O t).

Implementations may add timestamps, policy versions, hashes, signatures, evaluator identities, state digests, and substrate receipts. These enrich integrity and attribution but do not change the core requirement: authorization and execution must remain in the same lifecycle record. 

7.2 Completeness 

Evidence completeness requires that every governed execution have a record linking proof, approval, derived identity, mutation, and outcome. Rejected and escalated attempts should also be recorded because they explain what the system refused and why. Missing evidence is not an observability gap; it is an authorization failure. 

7.3 Replay 

A complete evidence record should let an auditor answer: • what mutation was proposed; • what context and policy were used; • which evaluators approved, rejected, or abstained; • what boundary was issued; • what execution occurred and what outcome resulted. Replay does not require reconstructing the entire external world. It requires preserving enough authorization-relevant state to re-check the decision under its recorded inputs. 10 7.4 Integrity 

The chain should be append-only and tamper-evident. Hash linking, signatures, immutable storage, and correlation with substrate audit systems such as CloudTrail can strengthen the implementa-tion [17]. DTF does not mandate one cryptographic construction; it mandates that proof, approval, identity, and outcome cannot silently drift apart. 

7.5 Relation to IEEC 

OpenKedge’s IEEC records the intent-to-execution lineage of governed mutation [1]. DTF refines the evidence requirements for replayable authorization by requiring explicit storage of the Justifica-tion Proof, evaluator attestations, governance metadata, and Execution Identity linkage. 

# 8 Safety and Audit Properties 

This section states system properties of the composed DTF pipeline. The claims below are not prop-erties of any component in isolation, and they should not be read as claims of semantic correctness for every approved action. They hold under the assumptions stated below, when Justification Proofs, consensus validation, Execution Identity, and Evidence Chains are implemented as the ordered au-thorization path. These properties are architectural rather than component-local. Traditional systems trust principals and then constrain their actions through policy and logging. DTF makes the decision lifecycle the object of trust: authority emerges from explicit proof, distributed validation, bounded issuance, and durable evidence. This matters in agentic infrastructure, where the initiating reasoning process may be non-deterministic, partially observed, or unreliable. 

8.1 Assumptions A1: Enforcement fidelity. The execution substrate enforces the action, resource, time, and obli-gation limits encoded in a valid EI .

A2: Evidence integrity. Evidence records cannot be silently modified or deleted after append. 

A3: Consensus enforcement. The consensus rule approves only when its configured quorum, veto, diversity, and escalation requirements are satisfied. 

A4: Proof correspondence. The stored proof and context correspond to the mutation attempt being evaluated with the fidelity captured in evidence. 

8.2 System Invariants Proof-bound execution. Under A1 and A3, any admitted governed mutation Xt has a correspond-ing JP t, At, and Dt = approve from which a valid EI t was derived. The substrate admits execution only through EI , and EI is issued only after proof approval. 

Consensus-gated authority. Under A3, no valid EI t is issued unless Dt = q(At, Γt) = approve .A single evaluator cannot create authority unless the governance rule explicitly defines that as suffi-cient. 

Non-escalation. Under A1, if Xt executes through EI t, then its effective scope is contained within 

Bt. This follows from Scope (EI t) ⪯ Bt and substrate enforcement. 

Evidence completeness. Under A2, each admitted governed mutation remains attached to an evi-dence record containing intent, context, proof, attestations, governance metadata, identity, execution, and outcome. 11 Replayable verification. Under A2 and A4, the authorization basis of each complete record can be re-examined from stored artifacts. Replayability is about the decision lifecycle, not perfect re-construction of all external state. 

8.3 Composed Pipeline Property 

Under A1–A4, every admitted governed high-stakes mutation is proof-bound, consensus-gated, scope-bounded, evidence-preserved, and replayable from its lifecycle record. 

Proof sketch. The DTF pipeline constrains each stage by the previous one: 

(It, C t, P t) → JP t → At → Dt → EI t → Xt → Ot → EC t.

Approval requires the proof and attestation set; issuance requires approval; execution requires a valid identity; identity scope is contained in the proof boundary; evidence stores the lifecycle. The listed properties follow by composition. 

8.4 Limits 

This composed property does not imply semantic optimality, correct policy design, complete world knowledge, or resilience to total compromise of all evaluators and stores. It establishes a narrower infrastructure property: high-stakes authority cannot be legitimately materialized without recorded proof, recorded approval, bounded issuance, and durable evidence. 

# 9 Implementation 

DTF is implemented as a verification layer over the OpenKedge-based governed mutation substrate used in our prototype. The prototype binds the abstract functions to this substrate and to AWS prim-itives, but the decomposition into proof construction, validation, authority derivation, and evidence persistence is substrate-agnostic. Our prototype consists of approximately 4,500 lines of Go and is deployed as a suite of highly available microservices. It interposes on destructive infrastructure operations, privilege changes, and production configuration updates. The implementation material-izes the model functions as explicit service boundaries and persisted artifacts rather than as implicit checks inside a single policy engine. 

Prototype footprint.                             

> Module LOC Replicas Primary model function
> Intent Gateway 650 3Normalize
> Justification Engine 1,200 3f,BindContext ,DeriveBoundary
> Swarm Coordinator 700 3q(At,Γt)
> Execution Broker 900 3h,Scope ,Valid
> Evidence Store Adapter 500 3EC tpersistence Evaluation Harness 550 1workload generation and replay
> Replicas are deployed across three availability zones for the online control path.

9.1 Function Realization 

The runtime path implements the functions from Section 3 as follows. • f (It, C t, P t) is implemented by the Intent Gateway and Justification Engine. The gateway canonicalizes It into I′

> t

, binds the request to a context snapshot Ct, evaluates the applicable policy bundle Pt, derives Bt, and emits the structured proof JP t = ( Mt, S t, Πt, R t, B t).• Each evaluator function vi(JP t) is implemented as an isolated worker that consumes the same serialized proof and emits an attributed attestation ati = ( vi, d ti, ω ti ). Attestations are signed and include evaluator class, input proof hash, decision, objections, and obligations. • The consensus function q(At, Γt) is implemented by the swarm coordinator. It verifies at-testation signatures, checks evaluator diversity and freshness, applies veto rules, computes the risk-adjusted quorum from Γt, and returns approve , reject , or escalate .12 • Boundary (JP t) is materialized as the boundary field Bt = ( μt, ρ t, τ t, Ωt) embedded in the proof. The broker treats this field as the maximum issuable authority. • h(JP t, A t, Γt) is implemented by the Execution Broker. It runs only after q(At, Γt) = 

approve , converts the approved boundary into a substrate-specific temporary credential, and records lineage to the proof, attestation set, governance metadata, and decision. • Scope (EI t) and Valid (EI t, X t) are implemented by broker-side admission checks. Before forwarding a mutation, the broker verifies that the effective action, resource, time window, and obligations of the credential are no broader than Bt and that the concrete mutation attempt is authorized by the issued identity. • EC t is implemented by the Evidence Store as one append-only lifecycle record containing the intent, bound context digest, policy version, proof, attestations, governance metadata, decision, issued identity reference, attempted mutation, and observed outcome. 

9.2 Components Intent Gateway and Justification Engine. The gateway receives proposed mutations via gRPC and implements Normalize by resolving aliases, validating schemas, and converting tool-specific calls into canonical mutation specifications. The Justification Engine (approx. 1,200 LOC) im-plements BindContext through concurrent state collection from Redis, inventory services, incident state, ownership metadata, and an internal graph database for dependency resolution. It then im-plements EvaluatePolicy and DeriveBoundary by loading a versioned policy bundle, assigning risk class and required governance metadata, and computing the maximum boundary Bt. In our deploy-ment, context gathering typically completes in under 20 ms, issuing 9 parallel reads per proof at the median and 17 at the 95th percentile. Serialized proofs have a median size of 6.4 KB and a 95th percentile size of 18.7 KB. 

Evaluation Swarm. The swarm runs independent evaluators over the same proof and applies 

Dt = q(At, Γt). Evaluators are implemented as stateless AWS Lambda functions to ensure par-allel execution and strict isolation. The deployed evaluator set contains 7 functions across 5 classes: 2 policy evaluators, 2 dependency-state evaluators, 1 risk evaluator, 1 simulation evaluator, and 1 human-escalation adapter. Low-risk mutations require 3 approvals from at least 2 classes; high-risk mutations require 4 approvals from at least 3 classes; protected-resource mutations additionally grant veto authority to the dependency-state and human-escalation classes. Attestations are compact, with a median serialized size of 0.9 KB. The coordinator rejects malformed attestations, escalates missing required evaluator classes, honors veto-capable evaluators for protected mutation classes, and requires risk-sensitive m-of-n cryptographic signatures before progressing. 

Execution Broker and Evidence Store. The Execution Broker derives EI t by exchanging the consensus-approved JP t for temporary credentials. It translates Bt into substrate-specific action, resource, validity, and obligation constraints, then performs a final Scope (EI t) ⪯ Bt check before exposing the credential to the execution path. During execution, the broker evaluates Valid (EI t, X t)

and refuses calls that drift from the approved action, resource, time window, or required obligations. The median identity lifetime is 300 s for destructive actions and 120 s for emergency break-glass actions. The Evidence Store persists EC t as an append-only ledger using Amazon QLDB (Quan-tum Ledger Database) to provide tamper-evident persistence, optionally linking to substrate audit receipts. Each logical lifecycle record is represented by 4 append events on average: proof cre-ation, attestation closure, identity issuance or refusal, and substrate outcome. The median complete evidence record is 11.2 KB. 

9.3 AWS Instantiation 

Our cloud deployment relies heavily on native AWS primitives. The broker implements h by as-suming short-lived sessions via AWS Security Token Service (STS), constrained by inline session policies and resource conditions generated from Bt [16]. The generated session policies contain a median of 3 allow statements and 2 explicit resource conditions; no generated policy in the evalu-ation exceeds 1.8 KB. Temporal scope is enforced through short session duration and broker-side expiry checks. Obligation checks, such as verifying that a target is no longer receiving production 13 traffic, are performed immediately before the substrate call. Evidence records are continuously cor-related with CloudTrail logs [17]. In the evaluated workload, this mapping provides containment without requiring custom substrate modifications. 

9.4 Instance Termination Path 

For TerminateInstance (r), the gateway normalizes the request into Mt =(TerminateInstance , r ). The Justification Engine binds dependency context, traffic state, ownership, protection tags, and incident state into St; records the governing destructive-action policy in Πt; assigns the risk and admissibility assessment Rt; and derives Bt as a single-action boundary over resource r with a strict 5-minute validity window and a no-active-traffic obligation. Policy, state, simulation, and risk evaluators attest to this proof in parallel. If Dt = approve , the broker derives an EI t scoped to exactly that termination action on r. Before execution, the broker re-checks the obligation and evaluates Valid (EI t, X t). The Evidence Store records both success and refusal paths with tamper-evident linkage. 

# 10 Evaluation 

The evaluation is a mechanism validation of DTF in a governed synthetic workload. It asks whether the implementation realizes the model functions—proof construction, independent attestation, con-sensus, authority derivation, boundary enforcement, execution validity, evidence completeness, and overhead—for high-stakes cloud mutations. Our testbed consists of a simulated environment mim-icking a multi-region cloud deployment handling 10,000 synthetic agent mutations over 50 indepen-dent runs. Each run contains 200 mutations and replays the same workload against DTF, standing IAM, and policy-only precheck baselines. Several metrics below are invariant-oriented. A 100% result for boundary refusal or evidence com-pleteness means that the implementation enforced the designed containment or recording invariant in this controlled workload; it does not imply open-world semantic correctness or universally cor-rect policy. We separate containment metrics, replayability metrics, and policy-quality questions. The evaluation supports claims about proof-derived authority and replayable enforcement under controlled scenarios, not unconstrained internet-scale agent behavior. 

10.1 Questions 

• EQ1: Proof construction. Does f (It, C t, P t) produce a proof containing the mutation, context, policy, risk assessment, and boundary fields needed for independent review? • EQ2: Independent validation. Do evaluator functions vi(JP t) produce attributable attes-tations, and does q(At, Γt) prevent unilateral unsafe authority derivation? • EQ3: Authority containment. Does h(JP t, A t, Γt) produce an EI t whose effective scope satisfies Scope (EI t) ⪯ Bt and reduces authority compared with standing credentials? • EQ4: Execution validity and replayability. Does the broker enforce Valid (EI t, X t), and can EC t reconstruct the authorization lifecycle? • EQ5: Overhead. Is the added latency acceptable for high-risk operations? 

10.2 Scenarios 

We evaluate three representative workloads: destructive resource termination (3,500 requests), pro-duction configuration mutation during partial degradation (4,500 requests), and emergency break-glass execution (2,000 requests). The workload includes 7,600 admissible requests and 2,400 un-safe or adversarial variants. Unsafe variants include missing dependency context (900), stale state (650), protected-resource targeting (350), post-approval boundary drift (300), and malformed evalu-ator outputs (200). Baselines are (B1) standing IAM credentials with standard audit logs and (B2) a policy-only precheck that still executes with standing authority. We exclude standard "human-in-the-loop" approval workflows from the latency baselines because human review introduces O(minutes )

of latency, which strictly dominates infrastructure overhead and is not directly comparable to auto-mated swarm consensus. 14 10.3 Metrics 

The metrics are proof completeness rate, attestation coverage, unsafe mutation block or escalation rate, authority reduction factor, boundary-violation refusal rate, evidence completeness rate, replay success rate, decision latency, and broker overhead. Proof completeness checks whether all fields of JP t = ( Mt, S t, Πt, R t, B t) are populated and hash-linked to their source artifacts. Attestation coverage checks that required evaluator classes emit well-formed attestations over the same proof hash. Boundary-violation refusal injects attempted action, resource, and time-window drift after approval and measures whether Valid (EI t, X t) refuses execution. 

Aggregate results.                         

> Metric DTF B1 B2
> Complete proof records 100.0% 0.0% 72.4% Required attestation coverage 100.0% ––Unsafe block or escalation 100.0% 0.0% 86.0% Boundary-drift refusal 100.0% 0.0% 0.0% Mean mutable resources per approval 1.0 450.0 450.0 Evidence completeness 100.0% 41.8% 64.6% Replay success 99.9% 23.0% 58.7%

Latency breakdown.                         

> Stage Mean p50 p95 p99
> Proof construction and context binding 18.5 16.8 34.7 48.9 Parallel evaluator processing 24.3 21.1 52.8 79.4 Consensus aggregation 3.1 2.7 7.6 11.8 Broker issuance and STS exchange 12.4 10.9 26.5 41.2 End-to-end decision latency 58.3 52.6 112.4 171.3

10.4 Findings Safety. DTF achieved a 100% block or escalation rate across all 2,400 unsafe variants in the gov-erned workload. In contrast, B2 (policy-only precheck) allowed 336 unsafe mutations through, corresponding to the 14% unsafe pass-through rate caused by stale local state or missing depen-dency context. This result measures enforcement of the configured proof, consensus, and veto rules, not correctness of every possible real-world policy. No single evaluator was able to derive author-ity without a consensus decision: all 200 malformed evaluator-output cases and all 350 protected-resource veto cases were rejected or escalated by q(At, Γt). In emergency scenarios, DTF success-fully processed all 2,000 break-glass requests while constraining the authority to the exact target rather than relying on broad administrative override. 

Authority containment. EI reduced the effective execution scope. While standing credentials (B1) exposed an average of 450 resources and a 95th percentile of 1,120 resources to potential mutation per role, DTF constrained authority to exactly 1 approved resource per request, yielding a 99.7% authority reduction factor at the mean and 99.9% at the 95th percentile. In 300 boundary-drift tests, attempts to reuse an approved identity for a different action, resource, or expired time window were refused by the broker. For destructive actions, this prevents the tested class of post-approval blast-radius expansion. 

Auditability. The Evidence Chain achieved a 100% completeness rate for the DTF lifecycle fields, persisting proof, attestations, governance metadata, decision, issuance reference, attempted muta-tion, and outcome for all 10,000 attempts. The 10,000 logical records produced 39,812 append events and 10,000 terminal outcome entries. In replay testing, auditors successfully reconstructed the authorization lifecycle for 9,991 events without manual log correlation, compared to 2,300 events under B1 standard audit logs and 5,870 events under B2. Replay failures were attributable to delib-erately injected external receipt loss rather than missing DTF lifecycle records. 15 Overhead. The governed path added acceptable latency for high-stakes operations. Proof con-struction and context gathering averaged 18.5 ms. Evaluator processing via parallel Lambda ex-ecution averaged 24.3 ms. Consensus aggregation, signature verification, and quorum evaluation averaged 3.1 ms. Broker execution and STS credential issuance added an overhead of 12.4 ms. The total end-to-end decision latency averaged 58.3 ms, with a median of 52.6 ms, 95th percentile of 112.4 ms, and 99th percentile of 171.3 ms. Even at the 99th percentile, the added delay remains small relative to destructive infrastructure workflows, which are typically dominated by substrate operation latency and human review time. 

10.5 Ablations 

Removing consensus leaves a proof object but reintroduces unilateral evaluator failure: in the malformed-output workload, single-evaluator approval would have allowed 61 of 200 malformed cases to proceed. This matches the swarm design rationale: heterogeneous evaluator disagreement matters only if it can block or escalate authority derivation. Removing EI preserves decision records but loses execution containment: all 300 post-approval boundary-drift attempts become executable because the substrate still sees broad standing authority. Removing the Evidence Chain preserves runtime gating but reduces replay success from 99.9% to 52.1% because auditors must reconstruct proof, approval, and outcome from separate logs. The mechanisms are complementary rather than interchangeable. 

10.6 Limitations 

The prototype evaluation tests high-risk mutations rather than benchmarking every possible agent action. Its containment and replayability results reflect architecture-controlled scenarios with known mutation classes, explicit policies, and injected failure modes; they should not be read as uncon-strained internet-scale benchmarks. Results depend on the fidelity of captured context, the correct-ness of policy, the quality and independence of evaluator classes, and the granularity with which the substrate can enforce EI boundaries. We do not claim resilience to total compromise of all evaluators, broker, and evidence storage. The evidence supports the narrower claim that proof-derived authority is practical and improves containment and replayability for governed infrastructure mutations. 

# 11 Discussion and Future Work 

DTF changes the object of authorization from a durable principal to a recorded decision lifecycle. That shift matters because agentic systems are non-deterministic and partially observed: the system need not trust the agent’s internal reasoning if execution authority can be derived only from explicit proof, independent approval, and bounded issuance. 

11.1 Tradeoffs 

DTF adds latency, storage, and operational complexity. These costs are justified for high-stakes mu-tations but should not be imposed indiscriminately on routine reads or low-risk operations. Evidence fidelity also creates a storage tradeoff: richer context improves replay, while compact records reduce operational burden. Evaluator diversity improves resilience but increases governance design work. 

11.2 Limitations 

DTF does not synthesize correct policy, guarantee globally optimal decisions, or solve prompt injec-tion inside the proposing agent. Its value depends on context fidelity: if dependency state, ownership metadata, incident state, or policy versions are stale or incomplete, the proof may faithfully encode the wrong basis for authorization. It also depends on evaluator diversity quality. A nominal swarm whose evaluators share the same data source, model failure mode, or operational blind spot provides less protection than its quorum size suggests. DTF also assumes that the governed path is actually interposed, that EI boundaries are enforceable at the substrate granularity required by the mutation, and that evidence integrity is maintained. Some substrates expose coarse permissions that may require a broker or mediation layer before DTF can 16 enforce narrow scopes. DTF is not designed to survive total compromise of the evaluator set, broker, and evidence store. These are infrastructure and governance assumptions, not model capabilities. 

11.3 Future Work 

Future work includes typed proof languages for JP , adaptive evaluator selection based on risk and historical disagreement, stronger cross-domain Evidence Chains for workflows spanning organi-zations, simulation-backed approval for irreversible operations, and structured human review for high-assurance escalation. 

# 12 Conclusion 

OpenKedge motivates and instantiates the governed mutation substrate used in this paper: intent, context, policy, bounded execution, and lineage. The paper’s contribution is DTF, a verifica-tion model for making authorization proof-bound, consensus-gated, scope-bounded, and replayable across governed agentic infrastructure. It introduces Justification Proofs, consensus validation, Ex-ecution Identity, and Evidence Chains as the mechanisms that turn an approved mutation into re-playable authority. The invariant can be stated compactly: no high-stakes execution without proof, no authority without consensus, and no valid mutation detached from evidence. DTF makes that invariant an executable authorization lifecycle for agentic infrastructure, rather than an audit aspiration after the fact. 

# References 

[1] Jun He and Deying Yu. Openkedge: Governing agentic mutation with execution-bound safety and evidence chains. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.08601 , 2026. [2] Ravi S. Sandhu, Edward J. Coyne, Hal L. Feinstein, and Charles E. Youman. Role-based access control models. In Proceedings of the 15th National Computer Security Conference ,1992. [3] Vincent C. Hu, David Ferraiolo, Rick Kuhn, Arthur R. Friedman, Alan J. Lang, Margaret M. Cogdell, Adam Schnitzer, Kenneth Sandlin, Robert Miller, and Karen Scarfone. Guide to attribute based access control (abac) definition and considerations. NIST Special Publication 800-162 , 2015. [4] Scott Rose, Oliver Borchert, Stu Mitchell, and Sean Connelly. Zero trust architecture. Techni-cal Report NIST Special Publication 800-207, National Institute of Standards and Technology, 2020. [5] Joseph W Cutler, Craig Disselkoen, Aaron Eline, Shaobo He, Kyle Headley, Michael Hicks, Kesha Hietala, Eleftherios Ioannidis, John Kastner, Anwar Mamat, et al. Cedar: A new lan-guage for expressive, fast, safe, and analyzable authorization. Proceedings of the ACM on Programming Languages , 8(OOPSLA1):670–697, 2024. [6] Craig Disselkoen, Aaron Eline, Shaobo He, Kyle Headley, Michael Hicks, Kesha Hietala, John Kastner, Anwar Mamat, Matt McCutchen, Neha Rungta, et al. How we built cedar: A verification-guided approach. In Companion Proceedings of the 32nd ACM International Conference on the Foundations of Software Engineering , pages 351–357, 2024. [7] Kai Greshake, Sahar Abdelnabi, Shailesh Mishra, Christoph Endres, Thorsten Holz, and Mario Fritz. Not what you’ve signed up for: Compromising real-world llm-integrated applications with indirect prompt injection. In Proceedings of the 16th ACM Workshop on Artificial Intelli-gence and Security , 2023. [8] Richard Fang, Rohan Binder, Jianlou Zou, Tyler Burgess, and David Wagner. Llm agents can autonomously hack websites. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.06664 , 2024. [9] Lei Wang, Chen Ma, Xueyang Feng, Zeyu Zhang, Hao Yang, Jingsen Zhang, Zhiyuan Chen, Jiakai Tang, Xu Chen, Yankai Lin, et al. A survey on large language model based autonomous agents. Frontiers of Computer Science , 18(6), 2024. 17 [10] Leslie Lamport, Robert Shostak, and Marshall Pease. The byzantine generals problem. ACM Transactions on Programming Languages and Systems , 4(3):382–401, 1982. [11] Miguel Castro and Barbara Liskov. Practical byzantine fault tolerance. In Proceedings of the 3rd Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation , pages 173–186, 1999. [12] Peter Buneman, Sanjeev Khanna, and Wang-Chiew Tan. Why and where: A characterization of data provenance. Lecture Notes in Computer Science , 1973:316–330, 2001. [13] Daniel J. Weitzner, Harold Abelson, Tim Berners-Lee, Joan Feigenbaum, James A. Hendler, and Gerald Jay Sussman. Information accountability. Communications of the ACM , 51(6): 82–87, 2008. [14] Martin Kleppmann. Designing Data-Intensive Applications . O’Reilly Media, 2017. [15] Jun He and Deying Yu. Sovereign agentic loops: Decoupling ai reasoning from execution in real-world systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.22136 , 2026. [16] Amazon Web Services. Aws security token service api reference. https://docs.aws. amazon.com/STS/latest/APIReference/ , 2024. Documentation reference. [17] Amazon Web Services. Aws cloudtrail user guide. https://docs.aws.amazon.com/ awscloudtrail/latest/userguide/ , 2024. Documentation reference. 18 A Notation 

Symbol Meaning 

I, C, P Intent, context, and policy spaces. 

J , A, G Proof, attestation, and governance-metadata spaces. 

B, E Execution-boundary and Execution Identity spaces. 

X , O Mutation-attempt and execution-outcome spaces. 

It ∈ I Canonical mutation intent at logical time t.

Ct ∈ C Bound context snapshot used for authorization. 

Pt ∈ P Applicable policy bundle and version. 

f : I × C × P → J Proof-construction function. 

JP t ∈ J Justification Proof derived from (It, C t, P t).

Vt = {v1, . . . , v n} Evaluator set selected for the mutation at time t.

ati ∈ A Attestation emitted by evaluator vi over JP t.

At = ( at

> 1

, . . . , a tn) Ordered attestation record. 

Γt ∈ G Governance metadata, including quorum, veto, and escalation rules. 

q : An × G → D Consensus function. 

Dt ∈ D Consensus decision, where D = {approve , reject , escalate }.

Bt = ( μt, ρ t, τ t, Ωt) Proof-derived execution boundary: action, resources, time, obligations. 

Boundary : J → B Map from a proof to its maximal execution boundary. 

h : J × A n × G → E Authority-derivation function. 

EI t ∈ E Execution Identity derived from an approved proof. 

⪯ Componentwise containment order over execution boundaries. 

Scope : E → B Map from an identity to its effective authority boundary. 

Scope (EI t) ⪯ Bt Issued identity scope is no broader than the approved boundary. 

Valid : E × X → { 0, 1} Predicate deciding whether an identity authorizes a mutation attempt. 

Xt ∈ X Attempted or executed mutation. 

Ot ∈ O Observed execution outcome. 

EC t Evidence record linking proof, approval, authority, execution, and out-come. 

Table 1: Core notation. Authority is modeled as a computed state derived from proof and consensus, not as a standing property of a caller. 19