Title: Offline-Verifiable Accountability for Cross-Organization Agent Messaging: A Preserved Evidence-Bundle Approach

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.28542v1

Published Time: Mon, 31 Aug 2026 01:17:30 GMT

Number of Pages: 17

Markdown Content:
# Offl ine-Verifiable Accountability for Cross-Organization Agent Messaging: A Preserved Evidence-Bundle Approach 

Adil Alshammari a,b, ∗, Hayretdin Bahsi a,c 

> aSchool of Informatics, Computing, and Cyber Systems, Northern Arizona University, United States
> bDepartment of Computer Science, College of Computer and Information Sciences, Majmaah University, Majmaah 11952, Saudi Arabia
> cSchool of Information Technologies, Tallinn University of Technology, Estonia

Abstract 

Cross-organization agent workflows require preserved evidence that remains independently verifiable during later audit or dispute review. Such workflows may involve multiple organizations, delegated actions, policy-relevant events, and disputed accountability claims. This is di ffi cult when live systems are unavailable, controlled by one party, or not trusted by all participants. Existing mechanisms provide useful pieces, including authenticated logging, delegation semantics, signed checkpoints, and consistency checks. What remains missing is a verifier-centered event-level bundle for checking evidence su ffi ciency o ffl ine under an explicit policy. We propose a preserved evidence-bundle model and a policy-controlled o ffl ine verifier for agent-to-agent workflow events. Each bundle preserves policy-required evidence, including sender authentication, authenticated log commitment, witness-backed check-point evidence, append-only continuity, delegation-aware authorization evidence, and, when issued and required by policy, explicit receiver-signed receipt evidence. The verifier accepts only claims supported by the selected policy-required evidence, giving a later dispute reviewer an o ffl ine basis for assessing evidence su ffi ciency. It does not infer delivery or receipt from transport behavior or log inclusion alone. In a prototype evaluation over 300 complete workflows and 1200 valid preserved bundles, we measure o ffl ine verifier-side latency across policy profiles and workflow-event evidence requirements. Checkpoint-context anchoring has the highest verifier-side latency in the current prototype, while events with delegation and workflow-prerequisite evidence require additional verification steps. In targeted negative-evidence tests, all corrupted or policy-insu ffi cient bundles were rejected, with no false acceptance observed. These results support evidence-based audit and dispute review without relying on live services or platform-specific logs. 

Keywords: Accountability, Agent-to-agent communication, O ffl ine verification, Evidence bundles, Authenticated logging, Delegation 

1. Introduction 

In cross-organization agent workflows, structured messages carry requests, results, and policy-relevant actions across ad-ministrative boundaries. Therefore, a later dispute may involve more than whether a message was sent. It may also involve au-thorship, authenticated logging, policy compliance, delegated authority, or whether receipt is supported by explicit receiver-signed evidence. Ordinary operational records are a weak basis for resolving such disputes. The needed evidence may be held by one party, changed after the event, or no longer available when the dis-pute is reviewed. A verifier may also be unable to query the original live system. The accountability evidence therefore has to be preserved in a form that can be checked independently of the runtime services. This issue also appears in recent work on multi-agent systems and AI-agent relationships, where studies    

> ∗Corresponding author.
> Email addresses: aha388@nau.edu (Adil Alshammari),
> Hayretdin.Bahsi@nau.edu (Hayretdin Bahsi)

discuss contestability, accountability, and credible agent iden-tity when autonomous agents operate across organizational or service boundaries [1, 2, 3]. This evidence problem becomes concrete in sectors such as healthcare. Prior work in this domain has examined privacy-preserving medical data protection and controlled access [4, 5]. Agentic AI and AI-agent systems are increasingly being studied for healthcare workflows and clinical decision support [6, 7, 8]. A single workflow may involve several organizations, delegated actions, and later audit or dispute review. In such workflows, a later reviewer may need evidence that can be checked without relying only on the systems that originally produced or stored the event. More broadly, recent surveys describe autonomous, goal-oriented, and workflow-oriented agent systems beyond the healthcare example [9, 10]. Industry reporting suggests that this is not only a theoret-ical concern. For example, a Cloud Security Alliance report states that 53% of organizations observed AI agents exceeding intended permissions at least occasionally, and 47% reported a security incident involving AI-agent behavior [11]. Surveys and assurance work on agentic large language model (LLM) arXiv:2608.28542v1 [cs.CR] 28 Aug 2026 deployments raise related concerns about permissions, dele-gated tool use, and third-party service boundaries [12, 13]. For this paper, the implication is narrower: the verifier should be able to check preserved evidence directly, instead of relying on platform-specific logs, live service access, or informal opera-tional assurances. We treat agent-to-agent message events as observable work-flow events at organizational boundaries. These events give the system a concrete point for attaching and preserving evidence. Later accountability claims are evaluated from the preserved bundle and the selected policy profile. The verifier can there-fore assess a specific preserved event without reconstructing the full runtime state of the agent system. The examples include LLM-based agents, but the verification model is not tied to an LLM or to a specific agent architecture. It applies to software agents that exchange structured workflow messages and preserve the evidence artifacts required by the selected policy. Prior work gives useful building blocks, but most of them are studied in separate settings. Transparency-logging and key-transparency work provide authenticated commitments, signed log states, and consistency checks [14, 15]. Dele-gation and auditable-authorization work addresses authority transfer, authorization provenance, and policy-governed ac-cess in multi-party environments [16, 17]. Formal workflow-delegation studies also show that delegated authority can in-teract with separation-of-duty constraints and workflow satis-fiability [18]. Formally verified accountability protocols define non-repudiation and evidence-driven verdict semantics for mes-sage exchange [19]. Our previous paper provided the message-level basis for this work by showing how a verifier can check message authorship and log inclusion from preserved artifacts without contacting the sender or receiver [20]. Its scope was limited to message-level evidence at a signed checkpoint. This article moves beyond that baseline to policy-controlled workflow-event ac-countability. The central question is not only whether indi-vidual evidence artifacts are valid, but whether the preserved evidence for a specific workflow event satisfies the evidence checks required by the selected policy profile. This leads to the following research question: How can message-level evidence for agent-to-agent workflows be ex-tended into policy-controlled workflow-event evidence that enables an o ffl ine verifier to decide whether a preserved bundle satisfies the selected policy profile and its required evidence checks? 

This question is addressed through four design objectives and claim boundaries. First, evidence is preserved per workflow event because later disputes usually concern a specific work-flow action, not only the overall system state. Second, veri-fication is performed o ffl ine because live services may be un-available, controlled by one party, or not trusted during later re-view. Third, receipt requires explicit receiver-signed evidence because receipt cannot be inferred from transport behavior, stor-age, or log inclusion. Fourth, acceptance remains bounded by the selected policy so that the verifier does not treat a valid signature, log commitment, or capability chain as proof of de-livery, endpoint correctness, semantic correctness, or workflow completion. The novelty of this paper is the policy-controlled, workflow-event-level verification of evidence su ffi ciency. For a spe-cific agent-to-agent workflow event, the o ffl ine verifier checks whether the preserved bundle satisfies the evidence checks re-quired by the selected policy profile. The key question is not only whether individual artifacts are valid, but whether the pre-served evidence is su ffi cient to support the claim under that pol-icy. Acceptance is interpreted according to these claim bound-aries, and the evaluation is claim-matched instead of a general throughput benchmark. The paper makes three contributions: 

1) Preserved evidence-bundle model. We introduce averifier-centered evidence-bundle model for agent-to-agent workflow events in cross-organization workflows. The model preserves sender, log, receipt, checkpoint, continu-ity, and delegation evidence as independently checkable ev-idence classes. 

2) Policy-controlled workflow-event verifier. We define a policy-controlled o ffl ine verifier for workflow-event evi-dence. The selected policy profile determines both which evidence predicates must succeed before the verifier returns Accept and which evidence-level claims are supported by the acceptance decision. Therefore, stronger claims re-quire the corresponding preserved evidence, such as receipt, witness-backed checkpoint, continuity, checkpoint-context, or delegation evidence. 

3) Claim-matched evaluation. We implement a proto-type and evaluate it using three experiments: policy-level verifier-side latency, event-specific evidence requirements, and targeted negative-evidence diagnostics. The paper is structured as follows: Section 2 reviews related work. Section 3 presents the system model, assumptions, threat model, and evidence-control boundaries. Section 4 describes the system design and evidence lifecycle. Section 5 presents the policy-controlled o ffl ine verification procedure. Section 6 defines the verifier acceptance semantics and bounded claims. Section 7 provides an evidence-level security assessment. Sec-tion 8 reports the evaluation results. Section 9 discusses impli-cations and limitations. Finally, Section 10 concludes the paper and presents future work. 

2. Related Work 

The closest related work falls into four lines: transparency logging, key transparency, witness-assisted consistency, and delegation-aware authorization. Transparency logging provides append-only log commitments, signed log states, and inclusion or consistency evidence [21, 22, 14]. Key-transparency sys-tems provide verifiable support for identity-to-key bindings and key-directory consistency [15]. Witness-assisted consistency uses additional observation or consistency evidence to reduce 2Table 1: Comparison of related work by verifier-relevant evidence support.                                                            

> Reference Year Context Evidence bundle Offl ine verification Signed checkpoint Inclusion proof Witness /consistency Delegation evidence
> Dirksen et al. [14] 2021 Web PKI ×△△△✓×
> Malvai et al. [15] 2023 E2EE messaging ×△△△✓×
> Li et al. [17] 2024 Medical data ×△×××✓
> Ferretti et al. [16] 2021 IIoT ×△△△×✓
> This work 2026 Agent messaging ✓✓✓✓✓✓
> Note: ✓=explicitly supported in the cited design. △=supports a related sub-capability, but not the preserved per-event bundle and policy-controlled o ffl ine verification model proposed here. ×=not supported or not explicit in the cited design.

reliance on a single log view [14, 15]. Delegation-aware autho-rization preserves evidence about authority transfer or policy-governed action in multi-party settings [16, 17]. In this paper, delegation means that one actor performs a workflow action on behalf of another actor under preserved authority evidence, such as a capability chain or a policy-bound authorization arti-fact. These lines provide useful evidence mechanisms, but they do not by themselves define a preserved workflow-event bundle whose evidence su ffi ciency is checked o ffl ine under a selected policy profile. Much of the related work strengthens one evidence prop-erty at a time. Some systems focus on transparency or logged-state verifiability. Others focus on cross-view consistency, del-egation semantics, or auditable authorization. On the logging side, the main cryptographic basis is Merkle /hash-tree com-mitment and certificate-transparency-style append-only logging [23, 21, 22]. These mechanisms underlie the inclusion proofs, signed log-state checkpoints, and consistency proofs used in append-only logs. Later, transparency-log and verifiable-storage systems use authenticated data structures to improve scalability, monitor-ing, and storage-layer verification [24, 25, 26]. These sys-tems address infrastructure problems such as scalable authen-ticated storage, log monitoring, and storage-layer verification. However, they do not define a policy-controlled preserved workflow-event bundle that allows an o ffl ine verifier to as-sess evidence su ffi ciency across Merkle inclusion evidence, signed checkpoints, receipt evidence, append-only continuity, and delegation-aware workflow evidence. At the deployment level, work on multi-ownership digital service chains shows how security responsibilities and security-relevant information can span multiple providers and admin-istrative domains [27]. This supports our focus on verifier-centered artifacts for o ffl ine assessment. Table 1 uses the verifier’s evidence dimensions to compare the selected studies. Here, an evidence bundle means a pre-served per-event artifact set for later verifier use. O ffl ine ver-ification means that a third party checks preserved artifacts and local trust inputs without contacting the live services. Asigned checkpoint records the committed log state. The inclu-sion proof binds an event commitment to the signed state. Wit-ness /consistency refers to witness-assisted or cross-view con-sistency support. Delegation evidence refers to preserved cryp-tographic evidence of authority for the events. Parakeet and LogPicker support authenticated commitments and consistency-related checks. They do not preserve per-event workflow evidence for later verification of a workflow event [14, 15]. DAMFSD and the auditable-authorization ar-chitecture of Ferretti et al. cover a di ff erent side of the prob-lem: delegation, authorization provenance, and auditable au-thorization. They do not, however, provide a policy-controlled workflow-event verifier that evaluates explicit receipt seman-tics, signed-checkpoint evidence, workflow-event inclusion ev-idence, workflow-bound delegation evidence, and bounded claim support under a selected policy profile [17, 16]. Formal work on non-repudiation, evidence-driven verdicts, and accountability shows how preserved evidence can support later accountability decisions [19, 28]. This motivates our ver-ifier model, but our scope is narrower. The verifier checks the evidence preserved for one workflow event under the selected policy. The decision remains tied to that specific workflow event. Our previous paper introduced a proof-carrying evidence layer for o ffl ine-verifiable agent-to-agent messaging. A veri-fier could check authorship, payload-hash binding, log inclu-sion, and the associated signatures from preserved artifacts alone, without contacting the sender, receiver, or a live ser-vice [20]. However, that work was limited to message-level evidence within a signed log snapshot. The present paper ex-tends that foundation to policy-controlled workflow-event ac-countability. For a workflow event, the o ffl ine verifier checks whether the preserved evidence bundle satisfies the evidence checks required by the selected policy profile. Depending on that profile, the required checks may cover explicit receiver-signed receipt evidence, witness-backed checkpoint evidence, append-only continuity evidence, checkpoint-context evidence, and delegation-aware authorization evidence. Overall, the related work provides important mechanisms for authenticated state, consistency evidence, authorization prove-nance, policy-governed access, capability-based access control, accountable credentials, and privacy-preserving access control [14, 15, 16, 17, 29, 30, 31, 32]. However, these works do not provide a verifier-centered preserved workflow-event bun-dle whose evidence su ffi ciency can be checked o ffl ine under a selected policy profile for cross-organization agent-message events. Therefore, we frame o ffl ine accountability review as an evidence-su ffi ciency problem: the verifier receives a preserved workflow-event bundle and checks whether the policy-required evidence is present, valid, and properly bound to the reviewed workflow event. 33. System Model, Assumptions, and Threat Model 

3.1. Deployment Context and Accountability Scope 

The model covers cross-organization workflows in which au-tonomous or semi-autonomous software agents exchange struc-tured messages across administrative boundaries. A deploy-ment may involve several institutions and several steps, with one organization initiating a request and other parties perform-ing delegated actions. A verifier may later review the preserved evidence without contacting the original runtime environment. The examples are illustrative and do not limit the domain. The framework applies when accountability depends on preserved cryptographic evidence. It does not assume continued access to online services. The unit of analysis is the message event, not generalized application state. Each accountability decision is anchored to a preserved evidence bundle for a specific message event and, when required by policy, its checkpoint and delegation con-text. We do not reconstruct arbitrary execution state. The ver-ifier instead checks bounded claims about message authorship, authenticated logging, explicit receipt, append-only continuity, and delegation-aware authorization. In this model, each evidence class supports a di ff erent bounded claim. Sender-authenticated inputs support exact-message binding. Inclusion and signed-checkpoint evidence support authenticated log commitment. Explicit signed receipts support a receipt claim only when preserved and verified. Wit-ness evidence supports checkpoint validation. Append-only ex-tension proof (AOEP) evidence supports continuity between authenticated checkpoints. Stronger checkpoint reasoning re-quires the corresponding checkpoint evidence. Delegation evi-dence supports authorization-related claims under policy. 

3.2. Trust Assumptions, Adversary Scope, and Claim Bound-aries 

The framework assumes standard security for the digital sig-nature and hash functions used in the implementation. It also assumes that the o ffl ine verifier has the required public keys and trust anchors. If a signing key is compromised, revoked outside the evidence context, or incorrectly bound to an identity, veri-fication is limited to the keys and trust anchors accepted by the verifier. The transport path is the channel used to transfer messages and evidence artifacts between parties. It may use ordinary op-erational protections, but it is not trusted as an accountabil-ity source: messages or artifacts may be delayed, replayed, omitted, reordered, modified, or replaced before o ffl ine veri-fication. Therefore, transport success is treated as operational information only, not as an accountability signal. The o ffl ine verifier detects tampering, omission, substitution, rebinding, or missing policy-required evidence only when these a ff ect pre-served artifacts checked under the selected policy profile. Mes-sage reordering during runtime is detected when it causes the preserved evidence bundle to fail a policy-required evidence check. Thus, reordering is treated as a policy-relative evidence-su ffi ciency issue, not as a complete reconstruction of transport history. We model the adversary primarily as an evidence manipula-tor, not as an attacker with unrestricted runtime control. The adversary may present incomplete bundles, inconsistent check-point material, invalid witness-related evidence, or forged ca-pability and workflow references in an attempt to induce an in-correct acceptance decision. The adversary model does not assume malicious replacement of the o ffl ine verifier’s trust anchors. It also does not claim pro-tection against compromised signing keys or collusion among all evidence-producing parties. Such cases are treated as trust-anchor, key-management, or deployment failures rather than evidence-verification failures. The verifier is assumed to execute correctly once provisioned with the required trust anchors, public verification keys, policy inputs, and policy-permitted o ffl ine references. It is limited to preserved artifacts and those local inputs. It does not query runtime services, treat transport success as evidence, perform online freshness checks, or reconcile live system views during verification. In this paper, a witness is an independent checkpoint obser-vation service. Its role is limited to observing checkpoint ma-terial, checking consistency with previously observed check-points when applicable, and co-signing checkpoint material. It does not receive plaintext payloads, issue receipts, infer re-ceipts, or decide whether a workflow action is correct. Wit-ness evidence is used only for witness-backed checkpoint va-lidity assessment and, when required by policy, append-only continuity validation. When checkpoint-context anchoring is enabled, the verifier may use preserved material from the wit-nessed checkpoint log (WCL) as context for checkpoint valida-tion. These claim boundaries are necessary because verifier accep-tance is limited to claims justified by the preserved evidence and the selected policy profile. The verifier supports an authen-ticated logged-message claim when sender-authentication and authenticated logging evidence validate. It supports a receipt claim only when an explicit receiver-signed receipt object is preserved and successfully verified. Receipt cannot be claimed from transport acknowledgments, HTTP status codes, forward-ing, storage, log inclusion, or execution side e ff ects. Accord-ingly, verifier acceptance does not establish delivery, endpoint correctness, or semantic correctness of the workflow action. Runtime LLM threats are also outside the verifier’s evidence-level scope, including prompt injection, malicious planning, and unsafe tool use. Table 2 summarizes the evidence-control boundaries consid-ered in the threat model. An evidence-control boundary is a point in the evidence lifecycle where evidence is generated, transferred, preserved, or evaluated. These boundaries are not trusted zones. They indicate where artifacts may be modified, omitted, substituted, replayed, or rebound before o ffl ine verifi-cation. 

3.3. Main Notation 

Table 3 gives the main notation used in the system descrip-tion, algorithms, and acceptance semantics. Several paper-specific terms are also used consistently in the sections that 4Table 2: Evidence-control boundaries and verifier implications.                                  

> Boundary Verifier implication
> Agent-side domains Verify sender identity and policy-bound evi-dence. Untrusted transport Do not treat transport success as evidence. Evidence-producing services Check only policy-required evidence. Preserved evidence stores Check for omission, substitution, or tampering. Local verifier trust base Use local policy, keys, and trust anchors. External action boundary Do not infer endpoint correctness or execution. Table 3: Main notation.
> Notation Description
> mCanonicalized message representation.
> h(m)Message commitment derived from m.
> H(·)Hash or commitment function.
> σSSender signature over the canonical message.
> σRExplicit receiver-signed receipt.
> σLLog signature over signed-checkpoint fields.
> πincl Inclusion proof for the message commitment.
> πext Append-only extension proof (AOEP) between checkpoints. WCL Witnessed checkpoint log for checkpoint-context anchoring. STH Signed tree head comprising r,t,τ, and σL.
> rCheckpoint root, as used in STH.
> tAuthenticated tree size or checkpoint index, as used in STH.
> τCheckpoint context, e.g., timestamp, as used in STH.
> Ccap Capability chain used as delegation evidence.
> PSelected policy profile.
> CP Set of verification predicates required under policy P.
> ΦUniverse of verifier predicates.
> φGeneric verifier predicate.
> BPreserved evidence bundle.

follow. An evidence bundle denotes the preserved set of arti-facts used by the o ffl ine verifier to evaluate one message event. A policy profile specifies which verification predicates are re-quired for acceptance. Authenticated log commitment denotes evidence that a message commitment is included in a signed checkpoint of the append-only log. An explicit signed receipt denotes receiver-signed evidence that supports a receipt claim only when such a receipt object is present and valid. Append-only continuity means that a later authenticated checkpoint validly extends an earlier one. We use πext for the append-only extension proof (AOEP) that validates this con-tinuity. Checkpoint-context evidence is preserved checkpoint material and associated WCL references that link a signed checkpoint to the workflow and policy context required for checkpoint validation. Witness-backed checkpoint evidence is a preserved witness signature or attestation over checkpoint ma-terial, showing that the witness observed the checkpoint mate-rial and, when applicable, checked its consistency with earlier checkpoints. Delegation-aware authorization evidence is pre-served authority evidence showing that one actor was autho-rized to perform a workflow action on behalf of another actor, for example through a capability chain or a policy-bound au-thorization artifact. The meaning of A ccept as the o ffl ine verifier’s acceptance outcome is defined formally in Section 6 as a policy-relative decision conditioned on the evidence required under P.

3.4. Evidence Support and Claim Limits 

Table 2 identifies where evidence may be generated, trans-ferred, preserved, or evaluated in the evidence lifecycle. In con-trast, Table 4 summarizes the bounded claim support of each preserved artifact: what the artifact supports and what it does not establish on its own.                

> Table 4: Evidence artifacts and claim limits.
> Artifact Supports Does not establish
> Sender signature Message authorship Logging, receipt, or delivery Log evidence Log commitment Receipt, delivery, or endpoint correctness Signed receipt Receipt claim Delivery or downstream execution Witness evidence Checkpoint support Receipt, delivery, or real-time equivocation prevention AOEP evidence Append-only extension Global consistency or collusion resistance Checkpoint context Checkpoint anchoring Continuity, receipt, or endpoint correctness Capability chain Delegated authorization Logging, receipt, or workflow completion

4. System Design and Evidence Lifecycle 

4.1. Architecture Overview 

Figure 1 shows the high-level architecture and evidence flows of the proposed framework. The design uses five logical roles: a sender agent, a receiver-side decision point, an append-only logging service, a checkpoint-witnessing role, and an o ffl ine verifier. Checkpoint witnessing is used only when required by policy. We use the term receiver-side decision point because the receiving organization may implement this role as an agent, gateway, policy service, or workflow controller. The required property is the ability to validate the incoming message and at-tach the evidence required by policy, not a specific software architecture. Following the flow in Figure 1, the sender agent originates a canonicalized message together with sender-authentication ev-idence. The receiver-side decision point validates the incoming message under the applicable workflow and policy logic. If val-idation succeeds, a verified digest of the message is committed to the append-only log. The logging service returns authenti-cated logging artifacts, including an inclusion proof and signed checkpoint evidence. When checkpoint witnessing is enabled, a witness contributes witness-backed checkpoint evidence. This evidence supports witness-backed checkpoint validation and, when required, later append-only continuity validation. The re-sulting artifacts are assembled into a preserved evidence bundle for o ffl ine verification. The architecture is verifier-centered. Live message process-ing produces preserved evidence. Later dispute resolution eval-uates that evidence o ffl ine. This separation allows the verifier to assess the preserved bundle without live access to the sender, receiver-side decision point, logging service, or checkpoint-witnessing role. 5Figure 1: Sender-authenticated messages are validated, logged, augmented with policy-required checkpoint evidence, and preserved as evidence bundles for o ffl ine verification. S e n d e r-s id e O rg s R e c e iv e r-s id e O rg    

> Sender Agent Receiver / Decision Point Shared Append-Only Log W itness Service Evidence Store
> A . R e p e a te d m e s s a g e p a tte rn (E v e n ts 1 -3 )
> signed canonical m essage v e rify sender + p o licy co m m it m essage digest inclusion proof + STH signed re ce ip t ( if issued) s to re evidence b u n d le
> B . P e rio d ic c h e c k p o in t w itn e s s in g
> checkpoint s tre a m v e rify consistency co-signed checkpoint s to re WCL + AOEP ( if p o licy requires)
> C . D e le g a te d s u b m it_ c la im
> signed subm it_claim + cap-chain v a lid a te d e le g a tio n + prerequisite co m m it c la im digest inclusion proof + STH signed re ce ip t ( if issued) s to re fin a l evidence b u n d le

Figure 2: Sequence-level evidence generation for the running workflow example. Event 1 is refer_patient , Event 2 is order_mri , Event 3 is send_result ,and Event 4 is submit_claim . Events 1–3 share the signed-message, validation, logging, and evidence-storage pattern. Event 4 adds delegation and workflow-prerequisite evidence. 

4.2. Evidence Issuance Path 

Issuance follows four stages. First, the system validates sender-authenticated inputs and any applicable workflow, pol-icy, or delegation conditions. Second, it commits the verified message digest to the append-only log and obtains authenti-cated logging evidence. Third, it attaches any additional ev-idence class required by the active policy profile. Finally, it assembles and preserves the evidence bundle for o ffl ine verifi-6cation. The running example is a cross-organization healthcare workflow executed by agents on behalf of participating actors. A workflow event is a signed agent-to-agent message instance that represents a workflow action and is preserved with the evi-dence required for verification under the selected policy profile. In this example, Event 1 is refer_patient , where a general practitioner (GP) agent refers a patient to a consultant. Event 2 is order_mri , where a consultant-side agent requests an MRI from a lab or imaging provider. Event 3 is send_result ,where the lab or imaging agent returns the result. Event 4 is 

submit_claim , where a claim-related follow-up action is sub-mitted to the insurer. The example is illustrative. The verifier operates on preserved evidence bundles and does not depend on healthcare-specific semantics. Figure 2 shows the evidence-generation sequence at the message-event level. Events 1–3 share the repeated signed-message, validation, logging, and evidence-storage pattern, while Event 4 adds delegation and workflow-prerequisite evi-dence. The canonical message representation m is the deterministic representation of the workflow message fields used for hashing and signing. In the prototype, each agent-message event con-tains an event type, case identifier, sender and receiver identi-fiers, timestamp or context fields, payload commitment, policy-context references, and sender-authentication evidence. This representation is used to verify sender authentication and to de-rive the message commitment h(m). The prototype evaluates preserved evidence generated from these structured message events, not a transport-level agent communication protocol. Algorithm 1 summarizes the issuance-side process that turns a validated message event into a preserved evidence bundle. Algorithm 1 follows the same issuance sequence: sender validation and message commitment in lines 1–2, logging ev-idence in lines 3–4, policy-required evidence attachment in lines 6–20, and bundle assembly and preservation in lines 21– 22. Lines 6–20 also show why stronger later claims are not inferred retroactively: receipt, witness, continuity, checkpoint-context, and delegation evidence must be issued, available, and preserved when required by policy. Evidence generation is therefore policy-aware at issuance time. If a deployment requires stronger append-only continuity validation, the runtime system must preserve the corresponding witness or checkpoint-context artifacts. If it requires explicit re-ceipt semantics, the receiver must issue and preserve a receiver-signed receipt object rather than relying on transport or storage side e ff ects. If delegation-aware reasoning is required, the del-egation chain must be attached. The verifier later checks these evidence classes under the selected policy. 

4.3. Evidence Bundle Structure and Verifier Inputs 

The preserved evidence bundle is the main accountability artifact evaluated by the o ffl ine verifier. It contains core evi-dence for sender authentication and authenticated log commit-ment. It may also contain policy-required evidence, such as explicit receipt evidence, witness-backed checkpoint evidence, 

Algorithm 1 Message processing and evidence bundle issuance                                            

> Require: Canonical message representation m, sender evidence σS, policy profile P
> Ensure: Preserved evidence bundle B
> 1: Validate sender-authenticated inputs over the canonical message represen-tation 2: Derive the message commitment h(m)3: Commit the verified message digest to the append-only logging service 4: Obtain authenticated logging evidence, including inclusion proof and signed checkpoint 5: Apply any issuance-time workflow checks required by policy 6: if Prequires witness-backed checkpoint evidence then
> 7: Obtain witness-backed checkpoint evidence 8: end if
> 9: if Prequires checkpoint-context evidence then
> 10: Preserve checkpoint-context evidence and associated WCL references 11: end if
> 12: if Prequires append-only continuity validation and a prior checkpoint is available then
> 13: Attach prior-checkpoint context and append-only extension evidence 14: end if
> 15: if Prequires delegation-aware authorization evidence then
> 16: Attach capability and policy-required workflow evidence 17: end if
> 18: if an explicit signed receipt is issued and preserved then
> 19: Attach explicit signed receipt evidence 20: end if
> 21: Assemble the preserved evidence bundle B
> 22: Persist Bfor later o ffl ine verification 23: return B

AOEP continuity evidence, checkpoint-context material, or del-egation /workflow evidence. If the selected policy requires an artifact and that artifact is absent or invalid, the corresponding verifier check fails. The verifier evaluates the bundle using only local o ffl ine in-puts: the selected policy profile, public verification keys, trust anchors, key-resolution references, and any checkpoint-context references permitted by the policy. It does not require online access to the sender, receiver, logging service, or witness. The system therefore separates evidence issuance during live mes-sage processing from later evidence verification under the veri-fier’s local control. 

5. O ffl ine Verification and Policy-Controlled Evidence 

5.1. O ffl ine Verification Procedure 

The verifier checks a preserved evidence bundle using local offl ine inputs, including verification keys, trust anchors, and the selected policy profile. It does not use transport logs, online ser-vice responses, or live infrastructure queries. The policy profile is a verifier-side input, not a choice made by the evidence pro-ducer for a later dispute. The verifier returns A ccept only when all mandatory and policy-required evidence checks succeed. Otherwise, it returns Reject . A minimal profile may require only sender authentica-tion and authenticated log commitment, while stronger profiles may also require receipt, witness, checkpoint-context, append-only continuity, or delegation-aware authorization evidence. Figure 3 shows which bundle components the o ffl ine veri-fier checks. The figure separates always-on core checks from policy-controlled checks and shows the local context used for 7Figure 3: O ffl ine verification inputs and policy-controlled checks over a preserved evidence bundle. 

offl ine verification, including the selected policy profile and trusted public keys. Explicit receipt evidence is profile-dependent: it is checked only when the selected policy requires a receipt-related claim. Receipt verification proves only the validity of the receiver-signed receipt object. It does not imply human reading, seman-tic understanding, successful downstream processing, or deliv-ery. Algorithm 2 performs the core checks in lines 1–4, the policy-controlled checks in lines 5–19, and the final A c-

cept /Reject decision in lines 20–24. It returns A ccept only when all mandatory and policy-required checks succeed. Sec-tion 6 defines the formal meaning of A ccept .

5.2. Append-Only Continuity Verification 

Algorithm 3 summarizes the verifier-side AOEP check per-formed when the selected policy requires append-only continu-ity between two authenticated checkpoints. Authenticated log commitment proves inclusion only relative to the signed checkpoint presented to the verifier. Stronger rea-soning across checkpoints requires append-only continuity ev-idence. Algorithm 3 verifies the checkpoint signatures, order-ing conditions, and append-only extension proof in lines 1–3. When required by the selected policy profile, this check shows that the later authenticated checkpoint validly extends the ear-lier one. This continuity check supports append-only continuity be-tween the authenticated checkpoints presented to the verifier. It does not support claims based on one isolated checkpoint. Broader claims, such as real-time equivocation prevention, uni-versal consistency across all observers, or resistance to log– witness collusion, require assumptions or evidence outside this 

Algorithm 2 Offl ine verification of an evidence bundle                                                 

> Require: Evidence bundle B, o ffl ine verification inputs, policy profile P
> Ensure: Accept or R eject with the first failing check 1: Validate bundle structure and mandatory fields 2: Verify payload-hash binding for the preserved canonical message represen-tation 3: Verify sender-authentication evidence σSagainst the canonical message and reject if absent or invalid 4: Verify authenticated log commitment via inclusion proof and signed check-point and reject if verification fails 5: if Prequires witness-backed checkpoint validation then
> 6: Verify witness evidence against the authenticated checkpoint 7: end if
> 8: if Prequires checkpoint-context validation then
> 9: Verify checkpoint-context evidence against the permitted WCL-backed context 10: end if
> 11: if Prequires append-only continuity validation then
> 12: Verify prior-checkpoint context and AOEP evidence 13: end if
> 14: if Prequires delegation or policy-required workflow checks then
> 15: Verify capability and policy-required workflow evidence 16: end if
> 17: if Prequires explicit receipt then
> 18: Verify explicit signed receipt evidence 19: end if
> 20: if all mandatory and policy-required checks succeed then
> 21: return Accept
> 22: else
> 23: return Reject with the first failing check 24: end if

AOEP check. 

5.3. Delegation-Aware Authorization Verification 

In cross-organization workflows, message admissibility may depend on authorship and logging. It may also depend on whether the sender or intermediary acted under valid delegated 8Algorithm 3 AOEP verification between two checkpoints                  

> Require: Prior authenticated checkpoint STH old , later authenticated check-point STH new , extension proof πext
> Ensure: Valid append-only extension or failure 1: Verify the authenticity of STH old and STH new
> 2: Check that checkpoint ordering and applicability conditions hold 3: Verify that πext validates append-only extension from STH old to STH new
> 4: if all checks succeed then
> 5: return valid append-only extension 6: else
> 7: return failure 8: end if

authority. For that reason, the bundle may include delegation-aware authorization evidence. The verifier treats this evidence as a separate input, not as something implied by message trans-mission. Algorithm 4 gives the capability-chain check performed when the selected policy requires delegation-aware authoriza-tion evidence. 

Algorithm 4 Capability-chain verification              

> Require: Delegation evidence Ccap , message commitment h(m), policy profile
> P
> Ensure: Valid delegation evidence or failure 1: Check actor-target consistency across delegation links 2: Check audience progression and parent-link consistency 3: Check scope and constraint consistency 4: Check temporal validity of delegation artifacts 5: Check message binding to the delegation context when required 6: Verify signatures or authenticators on delegation artifacts 7: if all required checks succeed then
> 8: return valid delegation evidence 9: else
> 10: return failure 11: end if

Delegation-aware authorization evidence supports authorization-related claims under the selected policy. It shows whether the message event satisfied the required capa-bility and workflow predicates. Log commitment, receipt, and workflow-completion claims remain separate evidence checks. Figure 4 shows the policy-controlled checks used by the fully enabled verifier profile and the single-control pol-icy comparison. In the figure, EPOCH /WCL denotes the checkpoint-context anchoring control implemented using pre-served WCL /checkpoint-context material. These policy-controlled checks are evaluated only when required by the ac-tive verifier profile and strengthen di ff erent parts of the pre-served evidence chain. In the single-control comparison, dis-abling one control removes only that policy-controlled check. The core payload-binding, sender-authentication, inclusion-verification, and signed-checkpoint checks remain enabled. 

6. Acceptance Semantics and Bounded Claims 

Section 5 described the o ffl ine verifier. This section defines the verifier-side meaning of A ccept . The decision is policy-relative and evidence-relative: it records that the preserved bun-dle satisfies the selected policy, not a general guarantee about delivery, endpoint execution, or workflow correctness. The statements below define verifier-side semantics, not cryptographic reduction proofs for the full runtime system. We use the notation from Section 3.3. Let B be the preserved evidence bundle for one message event, and let P be the selected policy profile. Let CP (P) be the set of verification predicates required under P. When the policy is clear, we write CP .We use φ for verifier predicates to distinguish them from proof artifacts such as πincl and πext . The verifier predicates considered in this paper are 

Φ = {φfmt , φ hash , φ sig , φ incl , φ sth , φ wit , φ ctx , φ aoep , φ cap , φ rcpt }. (1) These predicates correspond to bundle format validity, payload-hash binding, sender-authenticated message binding, Merkle inclusion verification, signed-checkpoint verification, witness-backed checkpoint validation, checkpoint-context vali-dation, append-only extension validation, capability and work-flow validation, and explicit signed-receipt validation. A policy profile selects the predicates required for accep-tance: 

CP (P) ⊆ Φ. (2) All verifier profiles require the following core predicates: 

CP core = {φfmt , φ hash , φ sig , φ incl , φ sth } ⊆ CP (P). (3) Thus, authenticated log commitment is checked through both inclusion verification and signed-checkpoint verifica-tion. Stronger profiles may also require witness evidence, checkpoint-context evidence, AOEP continuity evidence, capa-bility /workflow evidence, and explicit receipt evidence. 

6.1. Acceptance Conditions 

Definition 6.1 (Policy-relative acceptance) . For an evidence bundle B and policy profile P, acceptance is defined as Accept P(B) ⇐⇒ 

^

> φ∈CP (P)

(φ(B) = 1) . (4) Thus, B is accepted only if every mandatory and policy-required predicate succeeds. If any required predicate fails, the verifier returns R eject . Ac-ceptance is therefore policy-relative. A weaker policy may ac-cept a bundle that a stronger policy rejects. This means only that the weaker policy required fewer evidence checks. The preserved message commitment is represented as 

h(m) = H(m), (5) where m is the preserved canonical message representation and 

H(·) is the hash or commitment function. An authenticated checkpoint is represented abstractly as a signed tree head: 

σL = Sign L(r ∥ t ∥ τ), STH = (r, t, τ, σ L), (6) where r is the authenticated root, t is the tree size or checkpoint index, τ is the checkpoint context, and σL is the log signature. This is a semantic representation. It does not prescribe a byte layout. 9Figure 4: Policy-controlled evidence checks used by the fully enabled verifier profile and the single-control policy comparison. 

6.2. Claim Support 

Acceptance and claim support are di ff erent. A bundle may be accepted under a policy, but it supports only the claims justified by the predicates required by that policy. Let Claim be the set of evidence-level claims considered by the verifier. For each claim c ∈ Claim , let Req (c) ⊆ Φ be the predicates required to support that claim. 

Definition 6.2 (Policy-relative claim support) . A bundle B sup-ports claim c under policy P only if all predicates required for 

c are required by P and succeed on B:Supports P(B, c) ⇐⇒ Req (c) ⊆ CP (P) ∧

^

> φ∈Req (c)

(φ(B) = 1) .

(7) For an authenticated logged-message claim, the required predicates are 

Req (clogged_msg ) = {φfmt , φ hash , φ sig , φ incl , φ sth }. (8) This claim means that the preserved message is bound to sender-authentication evidence and to an authenticated log checkpoint. It does not imply delivery, receiver acknowledg-ment, endpoint execution, or workflow completion. A receipt claim requires explicit receiver-signed receipt evi-dence: 

Req (creceipt ) = {φfmt , φ hash , φ sig , φ incl , φ sth , φ rcpt }. (9) Thus, transport behavior, HTTP status codes, forwarding, storage, log inclusion, checkpoint validity, witness evidence, AOEP continuity, or capability evidence cannot replace φrcpt .

Definition 6.3 (Explicit receipt predicate) . When evaluated, the predicate φrcpt (B) evaluates to 1 only if B contains an explicit receiver-signed receipt object and that object verifies under the applicable receiver key, message commitment, and policy con-text. Otherwise, 

φrcpt (B) = 0. (10) 

6.3. Bounded Interpretation of Accept 

Proposition 6.1 (Bounded interpretation of Accept ). If 

Accept P(B) holds, then every predicate in CP (P) has succeeded for B. The accepted bundle supports only the evidence-level claims whose required predicates are included in CP (P) and have succeeded on B. No stronger claim follows from Accept 

alone. Proof. By Definition 6.1, Accept P(B) means that all predicates in CP (P) evaluate to 1. By Definition 6.2, a claim c is sup-ported only when Req (c) ⊆ CP (P) and all predicates in Req (c)evaluate to 1. Therefore, acceptance supports only the claims whose required predicates are satisfied under the selected pol-icy. Claims requiring predicates outside CP (P) do not follow from A ccept .

Proposition 6.2 (Policy monotonicity under fixed predicate se-mantics) . Let P 1 and P 2 be two policy profiles evaluated with the same bundle representation, trust anchors, verification keys, verifier inputs, and predicate definitions. If CP (P1) ⊆ CP (P2), (11) 

then, for any evidence bundle B,

Accept P2 (B) ⇒ Accept P1 (B). (12) 

The converse does not necessarily hold. 

10 Proof. If Accept P2 (B) holds, then every predicate in CP (P2)succeeds. Since CP (P1) ⊆ CP (P2), every predicate required by 

P1 also succeeds. Therefore, Accept P1 (B) holds. The converse may fail because P2 may require additional predicates. This monotonicity statement applies only when one policy strengthens another by adding predicates. It does not apply if the policies use di ff erent trust anchors, freshness rules, key-resolution rules, predicate definitions, or external verifier con-text. 

6.4. Corollary and Interpretation 

Corollary 6.1. Let B be evaluated under policy profile P. If 

φrcpt < CP (P) or φrcpt (B) = 0, then B does not support a receipt claim under P: 

¬Supports P(B, creceipt ). (13) 

Proof. By Equation 9, a receipt claim requires φrcpt . By Defi-nition 6.2, the claim is supported only if all required predicates are required by P and succeed on B. Therefore, if φrcpt is not required by P, or if it evaluates to 0, the receipt claim is unsup-ported. Thus, receipt cannot be claimed from transport behavior, log inclusion, checkpoint validity, witness evidence, AOEP con-tinuity, checkpoint-context evidence, or capability evidence. Similarly, A ccept does not establish endpoint execution cor-rectness, semantic correctness, workflow completion, universal consistency, real-time equivocation prevention, or runtime pro-tection against LLM-specific threats. 

7. Evidence-Level Security Assessment 

Section 6 defined the formal acceptance and claim-support semantics. This section assesses evidence-level security threats by mapping them to the preserved evidence they may invalidate, omit, modify, or rebind. It does not provide a separate crypto-graphic reduction proof or a full runtime-security analysis. 

7.1. Verifier-Supported Security Properties 

Table 5 summarizes the verifier-supported evidence proper-ties and the evidence required for each property. These proper-ties are derived from preserved evidence checks under the se-lected policy profile. The properties cover message binding, authenticated log-ging, checkpoint reasoning, and delegation-aware authoriza-tion. Explicit receipt semantics are handled separately because a receipt claim requires a preserved and valid receiver-signed receipt object. The distinction among P3, P4, and P6 is deliberate. P3 concerns append-only extension between authenticated check-points. P4 concerns witness-contributed checkpoint evidence. P6 concerns contextual anchoring of checkpoint material under the selected policy. The properties in Table 5 should be read together with the acceptance semantics in Section 6. 

7.2. Evidence-Level Security Threats and Mapping 

Table 6 links each evidence-level security threat to the af-fected evidence class and the corresponding verifier-supported property. The mapping is evidence-level rather than deployment-wide: it shows how identity spoofing, log tamper-ing, rebinding, repudiation, tampering or omission, and unau-thorized delegation may a ff ect the evidence checked by the ver-ifier. This assessment is narrower than a full runtime threat in-ventory. It explains which preserved evidence may be inval-idated, omitted, modified, or rebound by each evidence-level threat, and which verifier-supported property would be a ff ected. The mapping also provides the basis for the targeted negative-evidence cases evaluated later. 

8. Evaluation 

8.1. Evaluation Scope and Methodology 

Table 7 summarizes the evaluation design. The performance part of the evaluation measures o ffl ine verifier-side latency, and the diagnostic part measures rejection behavior over preserved evidence bundles. It does not measure memory utilization, net-work delay, delivery, runtime LLM safety, end-to-end orches-tration, or workflow throughput. The three experiments sepa-rate verifier-side latency attribution, workflow-event evidence requirements, and diagnostic rejection behavior. The evaluated workflow contains four event types: 

refer_patient , order_mri , send_result , and 

submit_claim . These are the same four events intro-duced earlier in the running cross-organization healthcare scenario shown in Figure 2. Briefly, the general practitioner (GP) refers the patient to the consultant, the consultant requests the MRI, the lab or imaging provider returns the result, and a follow-up claim action is submitted to the insurer. The labels are used as a running example. Verification uses preserved evidence bundles and does not depend on healthcare-specific semantics. Each workflow case was generated as a sequence of four signed agent-to-agent message events with distinct case iden-tifiers, actor identifiers, event timestamps, message commit-ments, authenticated logging artifacts, and policy-required evi-dence references. The 300 cases use the same workflow struc-ture but di ff er in these generated identifiers and preserved ev-idence artifacts. Across these cases, we generated 1200 valid preserved evidence bundles. In addition to the core verifier checks, the fully enabled profile requires witness validation, AOEP continuity validation, delegation /workflow checks, and checkpoint-context anchoring. 

8.2. Experimental Environment 

All timing results report o ffl ine verifier-side processing over preserved evidence bundles. They exclude application start-up time, manual inspection, agent execution, and artifact-generation steps not executed by the o ffl ine verifier. The pro-totype was evaluated on a Microsoft Surface Laptop Studio 2 11 Table 5: Verifier-supported security properties and required evidence.                                                    

> ID Property Required evidence and scope
> P1 Authenticated log commitment Inclusion proof and signed checkpoint; verified checkpoint only. P2 Sender-authenticated message binding Sender-authenticated message fields and payload-to-log binding evidence. P3 Append-only continuity Prior-checkpoint context and append-only extension evidence; policy-enabled. P4 Witness-backed checkpoint validity Witness evidence; does not imply receipt, delivery, or real-time equivocation prevention. P5 Capability and policy-required workflow checks Delegation-aware authorization evidence and required workflow evidence. P6 Checkpoint-context validation Checkpoint-context evidence and permitted WCL context; policy-enabled. Table 6: Evidence-level security threats mapped to verifier-supported properties.
> ID Security threat Aff ected evidence Evidence issue Props.
> T1 Identity spoofing Signed-message submission False or impersonated sender identity. P2 T2 Log tampering Log evidence Inclusion proof, signed checkpoint, or log material modified. P1 T3 Rebinding Payload-to-log binding Commitment, leaf index, or Merkle path modified or rebound. P1, P2 T4 Repudiation Sender evidence Sender denies authorship despite preserved sender authentication. P2 T5 Tampering or omission Witness /AOEP /context Required evidence missing or modified. P3, P4, P6 T6 Unauthorized delegation Workflow /delegation Capability or workflow evidence forged, rebound, or missing. P5 Table 7: Evaluation design and claim-matched purpose of each experiment.
> Exp. Evaluation question Method Interpretation
> E1 Which policy checks add verifier time? Single-control comparison over valid
> submit_claim bundles. Latency attribution relative to the ALL_ON baseline. E2 Does latency vary by event evidence? Paired comparison across the four workflow events. Event-level evidence analysis, not throughput benchmark-ing. E3 Does invalid or policy-insu ffi cient evidence fail at the expected check? Targeted negative-evidence cases mapped to checks, threats, and properties. Diagnostic rejection coverage, not exhaustive adversarial search.

running Windows 11 Home version 10.0.26200, with an In-tel Core i7-13700H processor, 14 cores, 20 logical proces-sors, 32 GB RAM, and Python 3.9.13 in a virtual environ-ment. All measurements were collected in controlled local exe-cution on an x64 /AMD64 architecture. The verifier and evalu-ation scripts were implemented in Python using standard cryp-tographic, web, and statistical-analysis libraries. 

8.3. Statistical Treatment 

Verifier-side latency is measured from the start of parsing and checking a preserved evidence bundle to the production of the final A ccept /Reject decision. For negative-evidence cases, the interval ends at the first-failing verifier check. We report medi-ans and P95 values because this latency may have a tail. The median gives the typical verifier-side latency, and P95 captures higher-latency behavior relevant to deployment. For workflow-event medians, 95% bootstrap confidence intervals are reported in Figure 5 to show the stability of the median estimates without relying on a parametric normality assumption. Workflow-event measurements are paired because each com-plete workflow case contributes one observation for each event type. We therefore use the Friedman test for the repeated-measures comparison, Kendall’s W for e ff ect size, and Wilcoxon signed-rank tests with Holm correction for post-hoc comparisons. The negative-evidence suite is treated diagnosti-cally because its purpose is to test rejection behavior rather than latency di ff erences. 

8.4. Policy-Level Latency–Assurance Trade-o ff 

Experiment E1 evaluates verifier-side latency attribution for policy-controlled evidence requirements. The compari-son fixes the submit_claim event because this event exer-cises the richest accountability path in the implemented work-flow: prior-event dependency, delegation-aware capability evi-dence, witness-backed checkpoint evidence, AOEP continuity, and checkpoint-context anchoring. Table 8 reports a single-control policy comparison. Each comparison disables one policy-controlled verifier control while keeping the same corpus and timing procedure. The purpose is to attribute verifier-side latency to policy-controlled checks relative to the ALL_ON baseline within the same exper-iment. It is not intended to compare absolute latency values with the workflow-event analysis in E2. Accordingly, E1 and E2 answer di ff erent timing questions. E1 is a single-control policy comparison using submit_claim bundles, whereas E2 is a paired event-type comparison within complete workflow cases. All 300 valid submit_claim bundles were accepted under each tested profile in Experiment E1. The ALL_ON profile serves as the within-experiment baseline for this single-control policy comparison. Across the E1 profiles, median verifier-side la-tency ranges from 183.04 ms under NO_EPOCH to 785.52 ms un-der ALL_ON . Disabling checkpoint-context anchoring produced the largest median reduction, 76.7% relative to ALL_ON . The remaining single-control comparison profiles produced smaller latency reductions. These reductions should not be interpreted as recommen-dations to disable verifier controls. Each disabled con-12 Table 8: Experiment E1 within-experiment verifier-side latency attribution under single-control policy comparisons for valid submit_claim bundles ( n = 300 per profile).                          

> Profile Disabled verifier control Median [95% CI] (ms) P95 (ms) Reduction vs. ALL_ON ALL_ON None 785.52 [774.38–799.62] 1064.33 –
> NO_WIT Witness validation 745.60 [738.85–755.89] 954.92 5.1%
> NO_AOEP AOEP continuity 761.93 [754.90–772.95] 1063.04 3.0%
> NO_CAP Capability /workflow check 761.82 [751.83–775.11] 1027.94 3.0%
> NO_EPOCH Checkpoint-context anchoring 183.04 [174.52–200.43] 417.64 76.7%

trol weakens a specific assurance component: NO_WIT re-moves witness-backed checkpoint validation, NO_AOEP re-moves append-only continuity validation, NO_CAP removes del-egation and workflow-prerequisite validation, and NO_EPOCH 

removes checkpoint-context anchoring. The comparison there-fore exposes the intended latency–assurance trade-o ff .

8.5. Workflow-Event Evidence Requirements 

For E2, the first three event types follow the same core evidence path: signed-message validation, authenticated log-ging, signed-checkpoint evidence, and preserved bundle check-ing. The submit_claim event follows the same path but also requires prior-event evidence from send_result and delegation /workflow-prerequisite evidence. This di ff erence ex-plains the event-level comparison in Figure 5. Experiment E2 evaluates whether verifier-side latency changes with the evidence required by each workflow event. Figure 5 summarizes median latency, 95% bootstrap confidence intervals, P95 latency, and median-to-P95 spans for the four workflow event types under the fully enabled policy profile. This comparison is interpreted as a workflow-event evidence-requirement analysis, not as a general throughput benchmark. The verifier is not simply checking a message signature. De-pending on the event, it may also validate workflow prereq-uisites, delegated capability evidence, append-only continuity, witness-backed checkpoint evidence, and checkpoint-context anchoring. As shown in Figure 5, the first three event types have nearly identical median verifier-side latencies: 399.98 ms for 

refer_patient , 400.37 ms for order_mri , and 401.13 ms for send_result . In contrast, submit_claim requires a higher median latency of 680.21 ms. Its P95 latency is also higher at 712.70 ms, compared with 429.83–434.84 ms for the other three event types. The Friedman test indicates a statistically significant event-type e ff ect ( χ2 = 536 .740, p =

5.20 × 10 −116 ), with Kendall’s W = 0.596. Holm-corrected Wilcoxon signed-rank tests show that submit_claim di ff ers significantly from each of the other event types, while the first three event types are not significantly separated. This behavior follows the evidence distinction stated before Figure 5: submit_claim adds prior-event and delegation /workflow-prerequisite checks beyond the core evi-dence path. Therefore, the event-type study identifies where additional verifier-side latency is introduced. 

8.6. Negative-Evidence Diagnostic Coverage 

Experiment E3 focuses on rejection behavior, not latency comparison. Each case introduces one targeted evidence cor-ruption or workflow misuse operation. Table 9 maps each case to the verifier check expected to fail first, the corresponding evidence-level security threat, and the verifier-supported property. Each negative-evidence case was generated from an other-wise valid evidence bundle by applying one targeted mutation or misuse operation. The cases are not intended to be mutually exclusive attack classes. Each case is designed to exercise a specific verifier predicate and confirm rejection at the expected first-failing check. Across the 17-case diagnostic suite, every manipulated bun-dle or bundle not allowed by the selected policy was rejected, and no false acceptance was observed. The cases cover all verifier predicate classes exercised by the evaluated fully en-abled profile, including payload binding, sender authentication, Merkle inclusion, signed-checkpoint validation, witness valida-tion, AOEP continuity, capability binding, workflow prerequi-sites, and checkpoint-context anchoring. These results support the claim that o ffl ine verification enforces evidence su ffi ciency under the selected policy, rather than merely returning a generic binary decision. The first-failing check also provides a struc-tured diagnostic signal for interpreting why the preserved bun-dle is insu ffi cient under the selected policy. 

9. Discussion 

9.1. Interpretation of Results 

The results answer the research question within the paper’s stated limits. They show that message-level evidence can be extended to workflow-event evidence in agent-to-agent work-flows. This extension is policy-controlled: the o ffl ine verifier returns A ccept for a workflow-event bundle only when the pre-served evidence satisfies the selected policy profile. The main result is not that every operational fact about a workflow action is confirmed. Instead, A ccept has a bounded and policy-relative meaning. Sender signatures support authorship. Log evidence supports authenticated commitment. Receiver-signed receipts support only a receipt claim when present and required. Capa-bility evidence supports delegation-aware authorization. Experiment E1 shows a measurable latency–assurance trade-off . The single-control comparison results should be read as within-experiment latency attribution: they identify which policy-controlled checks contribute most to verifier-side la-tency relative to the ALL_ON baseline. In the current proto-type, checkpoint-context anchoring contributes most to verifi-cation time. This higher latency is likely caused by the extra 13 refer patient order MRI send result submit claim   

> Workflow event type
> 400 450 500 550 600 650 700
> Offline verification latency (ms)
> 399.98 400.37 401.13 680.21 Median-to-P95 span P95 Median (95% CI)

Figure 5: O ffl ine verification latency across workflow event types under the fully enabled verifier profile ( n = 300 paired workflows). Circles show median latency with 95% bootstrap confidence intervals, square markers show P95 latency, and vertical spans show the median-to-P95 range. The y-axis uses a truncated lower bound for readability. The submit_claim event requires the most verification time because it exercises the richest workflow-accountability path. Table 9: Negative-evidence cases mapped to evidence-level security threats and verifier-supported properties. 

Case Verifier check Threat ID Property Mutation or misuse 

C1 Payload binding T3 P2 Canonical payload modified after issuance. C2 Merkle inclusion T3 P1 Audit-path sibling hash replaced. C3 Merkle inclusion T3 P1 Leaf index modified while preserving the bundle structure. C4 Signed checkpoint validation T2 P1 Signed checkpoint root modified. C5 Append-only continuity T5 P3 AOEP proof element modified between checkpoints. C6 Capability binding T6 P5 Capability scope modified. C7 Capability binding T6 P5 Capability evidence rebound to another message commitment. C8 Witness validation T5 P4 Witness signature over checkpoint material modified. C9 Workflow prerequisite omission T6 P5 Prior bundle for submit_claim removed. C10 Workflow prerequisite misbinding T6 P5 Prior send_result replaced by another event type. C11 Workflow prerequisite misbinding T6 P5 Prior bundle from another workflow case used. C12 Workflow prerequisite misbinding T6 P5 Prior bundle from another examination /resource identifier used. C13 Witness-evidence omission T5 P4 Required witness evidence removed. C14 Checkpoint-context anchoring T5 P6 WCL /checkpoint-context material for checkpoint anchoring corrupted. C15 Signed checkpoint validation T2 P1 Previous checkpoint signature modified. C16 Append-only continuity T5 P3 AOEP extension-size relation modified. C17 Sender authentication T1 P2 Sender signature over canonical message corrupted.    

> Note: T irefers to the evidence-level security threat in Table 6, and Pirefers to the verifier-supported property in Table 5.

work needed to parse and match WCL /checkpoint-context ma-terial, resolve checkpoint-context references, and validate the preserved context against the current evidence bundle. This does not weaken the value of checkpoint-context anchoring. It identifies the main optimization target when stronger o ffl ine as-surance is required at scale. Possible optimizations include in-dexing WCL entries by checkpoint identifier, caching already verified checkpoint contexts, pre-validating WCL material, and compacting context records. Experiment E2 shows that verifier-side latency depends on the evidence required by the workflow event. The first three events, refer_patient , order_mri , and send_result , have similar latency because they follow the same core evidence path: sender-authenticated message checking, payload bind-ing, authenticated logging, inclusion verification, and signed-checkpoint validation. By contrast, submit_claim adds prior-event dependency checking against send_result and delega-tion /workflow evidence. Therefore, the verifier must process additional evidence before accepting the corresponding claim. This explains why submit_claim requires more verification time, while the other three events remain close to core logged-message verification under the implemented policy. Experiment E3 shows that the rejection reason is also impor-tant. A rejected bundle provides more than a binary outcome. It also points to the verifier check that failed first. This supports audit and dispute resolution because the result includes both a policy-relative decision and a structured rejection reason. A failed Merkle-inclusion check indicates that the presented mes-sage commitment is not authenticated by the supplied check-point. A failed witness check means that the checkpoint lacks the required witness support. A failed workflow-prerequisite check means that required prior workflow evidence is absent or incorrectly bound. Together, these results show that the central design choice is not simply whether evidence can be verified o ffl ine, but which evidence classes should be required for the dispute being re-14 viewed. The verifier makes an evidence-su ffi ciency decision: it determines whether the preserved bundle satisfies the selected policy profile and whether the reviewed evidence-level claim is supported by the required preserved evidence. This distinction matters in dispute-specific review. In an au-thorship or repudiation dispute, the relevant evidence would normally be sender-authentication evidence, payload binding, and authenticated log commitment. In a receipt dispute, the ver-ifier must require an explicit receiver-signed receipt object, be-cause receipt is not supported by log inclusion, storage, or trans-port behavior alone. In a delegation dispute, the relevant evi-dence is the capability chain and any policy-required workflow evidence showing that the actor was authorized to act on be-half of another actor. In a workflow-prerequisite dispute, such as whether a submit_claim event was properly supported by a prior send_result , the verifier checks the preserved prior-event evidence and its binding to the current bundle. If the dis-pute concerns checkpoint continuity or checkpoint context, the profile should require the corresponding AOEP, witness-backed checkpoint evidence, or WCL /checkpoint-context material. This interpretation connects the evaluation results to practical policy selection. Latency alone should not determine the ver-ifier profile. A lighter profile may be su ffi cient for authorship and authenticated log-commitment disputes, while a stronger profile is justified when the dispute concerns receipt, delegated authority, checkpoint continuity, checkpoint context, or work-flow prerequisites. The evidence bundle therefore provides a structured basis for dispute-specific accountability. When the required evidence validates, it identifies which evidence-level claim is supported. When a bundle is rejected, it identifies which required evidence is missing or invalid. In both cases, it helps prevent stronger claims from being inferred from the preserved artifacts. 

9.2. Limitations and Threats to Validity 

Several limitations qualify the interpretation of the results. First, the reported timings are verifier-side prototype measure-ments rather than production measurements. They show fea-sibility and relative latency attribution in the evaluated imple-mentation, but they should not be treated as universal runtime constants. Larger deployments, multi-host execution, concur-rent agents, di ff erent storage backends, and longer checkpoint histories may change the absolute latency. The current evalua-tion also does not measure operational deployment factors such as network delay, organizational key-management processes, or independent witness availability. A second limitation is that the timing experiments answer di ff erent questions. The single-control policy comparison at-tributes verifier-side latency to policy-controlled verifier checks relative to its own ALL_ON baseline. The workflow-event analy-sis compares event types within complete workflow cases. For this reason, absolute latency values should be read within that analysis, not as a universal runtime benchmark. A third limitation concerns checkpoint-context anchoring. Its verification time reflects both the role of this evidence and the current prototype implementation choices. The result iden-tifies where verifier-side latency is introduced. It does not show that checkpoint-context validation is inherently expen-sive. The optimization directions discussed above, such as indexing, caching, and pre-validating WCL material, should therefore be evaluated in larger implementations. Fourth, the workflow evaluation uses a fixed four-step work-flow. This setup is su ffi cient to compare simple message events with a dependency- and delegation-heavy event. However, it does not establish performance or coverage for all possible workflows. Longer traces, branching dependencies, multiple delegation hops, and cross-case policy dependencies require further evaluation. Fifth, the negative-evidence suite is diagnostic rather than ex-haustive. It uses targeted mutations to exercise known verifier predicates. It is not exhaustive fuzzing or adaptive adversar-ial search over malformed bundles. It also does not cover all deployment failures. Endpoint compromise, key compromise, collusion, and semantic errors in agent decisions remain outside the framework guarantees. Finally, the framework evaluates preserved evidence only when such evidence is available. If no preserved bundle is avail-able, the verifier cannot support the corresponding evidence-level claim. Absence of a bundle is not treated as proof of the underlying workflow fact. 

10. Conclusion and Future Work 

10.1. Conclusion 

This paper introduced a preserved evidence-bundle frame-work for o ffl ine-verifiable accountability in cross-organization agent messaging. The framework extends message-level au-thorship and log-inclusion evidence for agent-to-agent work-flows into policy-controlled workflow-event accountability. Its central contribution is a policy-controlled o ffl ine verifier in which A ccept supports only the evidence-level claims justified by the preserved evidence required under the selected policy. The evaluation shows that the approach is feasible within these bounded claim semantics. Stronger verifier profiles in-troduce additional verifier-side latency, and submit_claim re-quires more verification time because it carries delegation and workflow-prerequisite evidence. The negative-evidence cases further show that manipulated bundles or bundles not allowed by the selected policy are rejected under the intended checks. 

10.2. Future Work 

Future work will first evaluate the prototype in larger multi-host deployments with concurrent agents and longer checkpoint histories. We will then optimize checkpoint-context and WCL validation to reduce verifier-side latency. We also plan to study longer workflows with branching dependencies and multi-hop delegation across organizations. Finally, we will investigate reduced-disclosure evidence views that preserve o ffl ine verifi-ability while exposing less workflow information to external verifiers. 15 References 

[1] T. T. H. Nguyen, H. Fournier, P. Jackson, M. Itoh, S. Free-man, R. Richard, H. Cao, Position: Multi-Agent Algorith-mic Care Systems Demand Contestability for Trustworthy AI, 2026. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2603.20595 .doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2603.20595 , arXiv:2603.20595 [cs]. [2] B. Lange, G. Keeling, A. Manzini, A. McCroskery, We need accountability in human–AI agent relationships, npj Artificial Intelligence 1 (2025) 38. URL: https://ww w.nature.com/articles/s44387-025-00041-7 .doi: 10.1038/s44387-025-00041-7 .[3] Z. Lin, S. Zhang, G. Liao, D. Tao, T. Wang, Binding Agent ID: Unleashing the Power of AI Agents with accountabil-ity and credibility, 2025. URL: http://arxiv.org/ab s/2512.17538 . doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2512.17538 ,arXiv:2512.17538 [cs]. [4] A. K. Jakhar, M. Singh, R. Sharma, W. Viriyasita-vat, G. Dhiman, S. Goel, A blockchain-based privacy-preserving and access-control framework for electronic health records management, Multimedia Tools and Ap-plications 83 (2024) 84195–84229. URL: https://link .springer.com/article/10.1007/s11042-024-1 8827-3 . doi: 10.1007/s11042-024-18827-3 .[5] A. Alshammari, D. G. Miandoab, S. Assiri, B. Cambou, B. Riggs, E ffi cient Medical File Protection via Adaptive CRP-based Ephemeral Key Encapsulation and Robust Er-ror Correction, in: 2025 IEEE 15th Annual Computing and Communication Workshop and Conference (CCWC), 2025, pp. 983–988. URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee. org/document/10903918 . doi: 10.1109/CCWC62904. 2025.10903918 .[6] B. G. Collaco, S. A. Haider, S. Prabha, C. A. Gomez-Cabello, A. Genovese, N. G. Wood, S. P. Bagaria, N. Gopala, C. Tao, A. J. Forte, The role of agentic ar-tificial intelligence in healthcare: a scoping review, npj Digital Medicine 9 (2026) 345. URL: https://www. nature.com/articles/s41746- 026- 02517-5 .doi: 10.1038/s41746-026-02517-5 .[7] L. Zhao, S. Liu, T. Xin, J. Tan, X. Wang, Y. Li, Z. Bian, Y. Chen, F. Kong, J. Bian, C. Qian, Z. Zhang, AI agent in healthcare: applications, evaluations, and future di-rections, npj Artificial Intelligence 2 (2026) 31. URL: 

https://www.nature.com/articles/s44387-0 26-00076-4 . doi: 10.1038/s44387-026-00076-4 .[8] X. Zheng, H. Zou, L. Wu, P. Dong, W. Yuan, Y. Chen, Large language model-driven agents in nursing practice: A scoping review, International Journal of Nursing Sci-ences 12 (2025) 532–540. URL: https://www.scienc edirect.com/science/article/pii/S235201322 5001309 . doi: 10.1016/j.ijnss.2025.10.007 .[9] D. B. Acharya, K. Kuppan, B. Divya, Agentic AI: Au-tonomous Intelligence for Complex Goals—A Compre-hensive Survey, IEEE Access 13 (2025) 18912–18936. URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/1 0849561 . doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2025.3532853 .[10] C. Yu, Z. Cheng, H. Cui, Y. Gao, Z. Luo, Y. Wang, H. Zheng, Y. Zhao, A Survey on Agent Workflow – Sta-tus and Future, in: 2025 8th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Big Data (ICAIBD), 2025, pp. 770–781. URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/do cument/11082076 . doi: 10.1109/ICAIBD64986.2025 .11082076 , iSSN: 2769-3554. [11] Cloud Security Alliance, More Than Half of Organiza-tions Experience AI Agent Scope Violations, Cloud Secu-rity Alliance Study Finds, 2026. URL: https://clouds ecurityalliance.org/press-releases/2026/04/ 16/more-than-half-of-organizations-experie nce-ai-agent-scope-violations-cloud-securit y-alliance-study-finds .[12] M. Q. Li, B. C. M. Fung, Security concerns for Large Language Models: A survey, Journal of Information Se-curity and Applications 95 (2025) 104284. URL: https: //www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pi i/S2214212625003217 . doi: 10.1016/j.jisa.2025. 104284 .[13] S. Stamnes Karlsen, M. M. Yamin, E. Hashmi, B. Katt, M. Ullah, Securing large language models: A quantitative assurance framework approach, Journal of Information Security and Applications 97 (2026) 104351. URL: http s://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/ pii/S2214212625003874 . doi: 10.1016/j.jisa.202 5.104351 .[14] A. Dirksen, D. Klein, R. Michael, T. Stehr, K. Rieck, M. Johns, LogPicker: Strengthening Certificate Trans-parency Against Covert Adversaries, Proceedings on Privacy Enhancing Technologies (2021) 184–202. URL: 

https://petsymposium.org/popets/2021/popet s-2021-0066.php . doi: 10.2478/popets-2021-0066 .[15] H. Malvai, L. Kokoris-Kogias, A. Sonnino, E. Ghosh, E. Oztürk, K. Lewi, S. Lawlor, Parakeet: Practical Key Transparency for End-to-End Encrypted Messaging, in: Proceedings 2023 Network and Distributed System Secu-rity Symposium, Internet Society, San Diego, CA, USA, 2023. URL: https://www.ndss-symposium.org/w p-content/uploads/2023/02/ndss2023_f545_pap er.pdf . doi: 10.14722/ndss.2023.24545 .[16] L. Ferretti, F. Longo, G. Merlino, M. Colajanni, A. Puli-afito, N. Tapas, Verifiable and auditable authorizations for smart industries and industrial Internet-of-Things, Jour-nal of Information Security and Applications 59 (2021) 102848. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.co m/science/article/pii/S2214212621000831 .doi: 10.1016/j.jisa.2021.102848 .16 [17] M. Li, J. Xue, Z. Liu, Y. Suo, T. Lei, Y. Wang, DAMFSD: A decentralized authorization model with flexible and se-cure delegation, Internet of Things 27 (2024) 101317. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/scienc e/article/pii/S2542660524002580 . doi: 10.1016/ j.iot.2024.101317 .[18] B. Yang, H. Hu, Delegation Security Analysis in Work-flow Systems, IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing 21 (2024) 229–240. URL: https: //ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/10052704 .doi: 10.1109/TDSC.2023.3248602 .[19] R. Falanji, M. Asplund, N. Carlsson, MoMEP: A formally verified protocol with modifiable signed messages, Jour-nal of Information Security and Applications 98 (2026) 104378. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.co m/science/article/pii/S2214212626000086 .doi: 10.1016/j.jisa.2026.104378 .[20] A. Alshammari, S. Assiri, H. Bahsi, Authenticated and Offl ine-Verifiable Agent-to-Agent Messaging for LLM Agents, in: 2026 IEEE 16th Annual Computing and Com-munication Workshop and Conference (CCWC), 2026, pp. 1424–1430. URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee. org/document/11393740 . doi: 10.1109/CCWC67433. 2026.11393740 .[21] B. Laurie, E. Messeri, R. Stradling, Certificate Trans-parency Version 2.0, Request for Comments RFC 9162, Internet Engineering Task Force, 2021. URL: https: //datatracker.ietf.org/doc/rfc9162 . doi: 10.174 87/RFC9162 .[22] R. Dahlberg, T. Pulls, Verifiable Light-Weight Monitor-ing for Certificate Transparency Logs, in: N. Gruschka (Ed.), Secure IT Systems, Springer International Publish-ing, Cham, 2018, pp. 171–183. doi: 10.1007/978-3-0 30-03638-6_11 .[23] R. C. Merkle, A Digital Signature Based on a Conven-tional Encryption Function, in: C. Pomerance (Ed.), Ad-vances in Cryptology — CRYPTO ’87, Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 1988, pp. 369–378. doi: 10.1007/3-540-4 8184-2_32 .[24] Y. Hu, K. Hooshmand, H. Kalidhindi, S. J. Yang, R. A. Popa, Merkle2: A Low-Latency Transparency Log Sys-tem, in: 2021 IEEE Symposium on Security and Pri-vacy (SP), 2021, pp. 285–303. URL: https://ieeexp lore.ieee.org/document/9519459/citations .doi: 10.1109/SP40001.2021.00088 , iSSN: 2375-1207. [25] V. Fang, E. Dauterman, A. Ravoor, A. Dewan, R. A. Popa, LegoLog: A configurable transparency log, in: 2025 IEEE 10th European Symposium on Security and Privacy (EuroS&P), 2025, pp. 1082–1103. URL: https: //ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/11129295 .doi: 10.1109/EuroSP63326.2025.00066 , iSSN: 2995-1356. [26] C. Yue, T. T. A. Dinh, Z. Xie, M. Zhang, G. Chen, B. C. Ooi, X. Xiao, GlassDB: An E ffi cient Verifiable Ledger Database System Through Transparency, Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment 16 (2023) 1359–1371. URL: http s://dl.acm.org/doi/10.14778/3583140.3583152 .doi: 10.14778/3583140.3583152 .[27] M. Repetto, Cybersecurity Digital Twins: Concept, blueprint, and challenges for multi-ownership digital ser-vice chains, Journal of Information Security and Applica-tions 96 (2026) 104299. URL: https://www.scienced irect.com/science/article/pii/S22142126250 03369 . doi: 10.1016/j.jisa.2025.104299 .[28] R. Küsters, T. Truderung, A. Vogt, Accountability: defini-tion and relationship to verifiability, in: Proceedings of the 17th ACM conference on Computer and communications security, CCS ’10, Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2010, pp. 526–535. URL: https: //dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/1866307.1866366 .doi: 10.1145/1866307.1866366 .[29] X. Zhu, S. Zou, G. Xu, J. Xi, Group-Capability-Based Access Control with Ring Signature, Journal of Informa-tion Security and Applications 90 (2025) 104014. URL: 

https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/arti cle/pii/S2214212625000523 . doi: 10.1016/j.jisa .2025.104014 .[30] S. Tegane, F. Semchedine, A. Boudries, An extended Attribute-based access control with controlled delegation in IoT, Journal of Information Security and Applications 76 (2023) 103473. URL: https://www.sciencedirec t.com/science/article/pii/S2214212623000571 .doi: 10.1016/j.jisa.2023.103473 .[31] H. Cheng, X. Li, H. Zhao, T. Zhou, B. Yu, N. Sheng, S-Cred: An accountable anonymous credential scheme with decentralized verification and flexible revocation, Jour-nal of Information Security and Applications 82 (2024) 103735. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.co m/science/article/pii/S2214212624000383 .doi: 10.1016/j.jisa.2024.103735 .[32] Q. Hu, C. Huang, G. Zhang, L. Cai, T. Jiang, Towards accountable and privacy-preserving blockchain-based ac-cess control for data sharing, Journal of Information Se-curity and Applications 85 (2024) 103866. URL: https: //www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pi i/S2214212624001686 . doi: 10.1016/j.jisa.2024. 103866 .17