Fault-Tolerant Budget Conservation in Distributed
Multi-Agent Delegation
GENLIANG ZHU, Accentrust, Canada and Georgia Institute of Technology, USA
CHU WANG, Accentrust, Canada and University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, USA
Resource limits are becoming an authorization boundary for AI agents that delegate work across concur-
rent and failure-prone workers. Parent-child allocation constraints, affine objects, and distributed escrow
do not by themselves prevent overspend when replies are lost, effects complete after timeout, messages re-
peat, branches partition, or DAG joins alias one lineage. We formalize fault-tolerant budget conservation
for distributed multi-agent delegation. Budgets are quantized resource vectors represented by exclusive es-
crow credits that move through a delegation DAG. Before dispatch, a branch converts credit into an oper-
ation reservation bound to lineage, epoch, normalized effect, maximum charge, receiver, and idempotency
key. It persists a signed dispatch permit with quarantine; the gateway verifies that permit before first ac-
ceptance. Uncertain effects remain charged until authenticated settlement, a fenced authoritative no-effect
proof, or permanent retirement. We prove ownership partition, ledger and effect conservation, descendant
non-amplification, at-most-once settlement, late-completion safety, and partition confinement under explicit
mediation, durability, authentication, normalization, and gateway assumptions. An indistinguishability result
shows that partition-local availability requires exclusive preallocation. Bounded TLA+ checking, an indepen-
dent JavaScript explorer, and crash-injected two-process SQLite experiments exercise the declared scope and
detect timeout-refund and historical-certificate-validation mutants. The mechanism preserves the issued bud-
get bound across the evaluated crash, retry, duplicate, partition, join, and late-completion schedules.
CCS Concepts: • Security and privacy →Access control; Formal security models; • Software and its
engineering →Formal methods.
Additional Key Words and Phrases: AI agents, multi-agent systems, distributed systems, resource governance,
budget enforcement, delegation, fault tolerance, network partitions, escrow, double spending, external effects
1
Introduction
AI agents increasingly act as spenders, callers, schedulers, and delegators. A user may authorize a
procurement agent to spend at most $500, an incident agent to issue at most 20 production writes,
or a research coordinator to make at most 100 paid API calls. The coordinator can then create
workers, workers can create specialists, and multiple branches can converge at a final reviewer. A
scalar “remaining budget” is no longer a local counter. It is a consumable authorization resource
moving through a distributed, asynchronous delegation graph.
Here fault-tolerant means that the safety bound is preserved across declared crash and com-
munication faults. It does not mean every isolated branch remains available or every uncertain
operation eventually resolves.
Recent work makes important parts of this problem explicit. Agent Contracts defines multi-
dimensional resource constraints and a conservation law requiring child allocations to remain
within the parent contract [48]. Token Budgets documents 63 production budget overruns and
uses affine ownership to reject in-process aliasing, double-spending, and use-after-delegation [22].
AIP binds identity, attenuated authorization, provenance, and completion records across the Model
Context Protocol (MCP), Agent2Agent (A2A), and HTTP [36]. Attenuating Authorization Tokens
specify offline holder-derived restriction of tool and argument authority, depth, and lifetime while
Authors’ Contact Information: Genliang Zhu, Accentrust, Vancouver, Canada and Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta,
Georgia, USA, research@accentrust.com; Chu Wang, Accentrust, Vancouver, Canada and University of Illinois Urbana-
Champaign, Urbana, Illinois, USA, wally@accentrust.com.
arXiv:2610.00349v1  [cs.AI]  29 Sep 2026


2
Zhu and Wang
Allocation-safe appearance, unsafe settlement
Root
budget 𝐵= 2
Worker B
spend own 1
Worker A
reserve 1; dispatch
Timeout
refund 1; B spends
Late A effect
total = 3 > 2
lost reply
Fault-tolerant response: uncertainty retains the right
Root
budget 𝐵= 2
Worker A
reserve 1; dispatch
Indeterminate
keep reserved
Reconcile
receipt / no-effect proof
One transition
commit or return
lost reply
Fig. 1. Parent/child allocation conservation does not prevent a timeout-refund/late-completion double spend.
The safe trace keeps the reservation charged while the external outcome is indeterminate. Color is redundant
with labels and arrow meaning.
leaving transport binding deployment-specific [32]. Together, these systems establish the alloca-
tion, affine-ownership, identity, and attenuation foundations on which this paper builds. Our con-
tribution is the coupling of exclusive vector credit lineage with accepted and uncertain external-
effect coverage across crashes, partitions, retries, and multi-parent joins.
The settlement gap. Allocation safety is not execution safety. Consider a root grant of two paid
effects. The coordinator allocates one unit to each of workers 𝐴and 𝐵, so the allocation law is
satisfied. Worker 𝐵first spends its own unit. Worker 𝐴then reserves its unit and sends a payment
request. The response is lost. Its controller times out, declares the worker dead, and refunds the unit
to the parent. Worker 𝐵spends that refunded unit, after which the original 𝐴payment completes.
Every allocation calculation was locally plausible; three effects have nevertheless consumed a two-
effect authorization.
Figure 1 separates the unsafe trace from the required response. The missing object in this
allocation-only trace is an explicit effect obligation: once an external effect may have crossed
the durability boundary, its budget remains reserved through uncertainty. Recovery may query,
settle, or permanently retire the obligation; elapsed time alone cannot make the right spendable
again.
Why a delegation DAG is harder than a tree. Agent delegation is not necessarily hierarchical. Two
branches may ask a shared specialist to synthesize results; a reviewer may join multiple principal-
approved inputs; retries may reconstruct a worker under a new process identity. A child with two
incoming references does not thereby own the sum of both ancestors. If those references alias one
credit generation, adding them creates authority. The budget-ownership relation must therefore
preserve disjoint lineage even when the task graph has joins.
Dual conservation. The paper distinguishes two properties:
ledger conservation:
Avail + Transit + Reserved + Quarantined
+ Committed + Forfeited = Issued,
(1)
effect conservation:
∀𝜄∈Obs, ∃! 𝑜∶Covered(𝜄, 𝑜),
Exposure𝑔⪯B𝑔.
(2)
Equation (1) prevents rights from being created and keeps ambiguous dispatched work visible in
the quarantined bucket. Equation (2) prevents a real effect instance from becoming unaccounted
while messages, controllers, and receipts disagree, and bounds settled actual charge plus the max-
imum charge of uncertain operations. The unique operation 𝑜is quarantined, committed, or con-
servatively forfeited; injectivity prevents one reservation from covering two distinct instances.


Fault-Tolerant Budget Conservation in Agent Delegation
3
Neither equation implies the other without the binding and maximum-charge assumptions stated
in Section 3.
Approach. We model each root grant as a vector of quantized resources. The issuer creates ex-
clusive escrow credits. Delegation moves a subvector into a fresh child generation and atomically
removes it from the parent generation. A branch can spend locally during a partition only from
its exclusive escrow. Before dispatch, the branch durably creates a reservation bound to the root,
credit lineage, current epoch, normalized effect, maximum charge, receiver, and stable operation
key. Dispatch changes the obligation state but does not refund. Authenticated, effect-bound suc-
cess receipts are applied at most once; verified no-effect certificates return the reservation; irrecov-
erable uncertainty can be permanently forfeited but not silently reused.
Contributions. This paper makes five contributions:
(1) A fault-aware authorization semantics. We define resource vectors, exclusive credits, a del-
egation DAG, operation obligations, authenticated terminal evidence, and a transition system
that separates allocation, execution, settlement, and effect coverage.
(2) A fault-tolerant protocol. We give algorithms for idempotent split/delegation, local reserva-
tion, dispatch, terminal-evidence settlement, multi-parent join, recovery, epoch fencing, and
safe reclaim, together with refinement obligations for MCP/A2A/HTTP adapters.
(3) Conditional safety results. We prove ownership partition, global conservation, descendant
non-amplification, at-most-once settlement, effect-instance coverage, an external exposure
bound, late-completion safety, and partition confinement. We state an explicit trace-lifting
criterion that a concrete runtime must discharge before inheriting those abstract results.
(4) A coordination boundary. An indistinguishability argument shows why a shared, unallo-
cated unit cannot remain spendable in every partition without risking amplification. Exclusive
preallocation buys local availability; reallocation and reclaim may require coordination.
(5) An evidence-disciplined reference profile. We specify a provider-free artifact that connects
finite model checking, transition-level invariant checks, mutation, fault injection, and descrip-
tive local timing to explicit claims. Hosted-model quality and production deployment remain
outside the evidence.
Non-goals. We do not invent escrow, bounded counters, leases, Sagas, idempotency, transac-
tional tool use, commit-time authorization, or delegation tokens. We do not guarantee exactly-once
network delivery, roll back irreversible effects, infer prices, optimize allocation, tolerate Byzantine
infrastructure, or remain globally available through arbitrary partitions.
2
Background and Closest Work
2.1
Resource-Bounded Agent Execution
Agent Contracts unifies input/output specifications, skill sets, multi-dimensional resources, tem-
poral bounds, success criteria, and termination in one lifecycle [48]. For delegation it requires
∑𝑖𝑅𝑖≤𝑅parent, supports recursive subcontracts and returned capacity, and reports zero conser-
vation violations in a 50-topic three-agent pipeline. Its hard monitor checks between actions, and
the paper explicitly notes that a single call can exceed a budget before usage is known. Our work
treats Agent Contracts as the closest allocation-level neighbor. Our question is what happens after
allocation when messages duplicate, branches partition, a process crashes, or an external effect is
uncertain.
Token Budgets establishes that an ordinary copyable number is the wrong abstraction [22].
Its affine Rust object prevents a cost-bearing value from being cloned, double-spent, or used af-
ter delegation within the type-system envelope. The paper also quantifies static over-reservation,


4
Zhu and Wang
sketches distributed reservation using mechanisms such as Sagas, consensus, and leases, and iden-
tifies distributed partial failure as a substantial open extension. Our protocol adopts the same
move-not-copy intuition but makes that extension explicit across processes, languages, protocols,
crash recovery, and DAG joins.
CapLease is the closest durable-authorization neighbor: it records consumable authorization
state across retries, concurrent use, delegation, and crash recovery, with an idempotent receiver
contract [47]. It therefore establishes durable agent authorization as direct prior art. The distinct
contribution here is partition-aware transfer of exclusive multi-dimensional credit through a dele-
gation DAG, including atomic multi-parent joins, together with one conservation argument span-
ning both credit lineage and accepted or uncertain external effects.
Among the systems compared here, EpochX is the closest credits-native infrastructure: it locks
task bounties, delegates budgets recursively, and settles rewards on acceptance [46]. Its focus is a
production marketplace and reusable asset economy. Our focus is the prefix invariant and effect-
coverage semantics when transfer, settlement, retry, and recovery traces are duplicated, reordered,
lost, partitioned, or crash-interrupted.
2.2
Delegation Identity and Scope Attenuation
AIP supplies verifiable identity, attenuated authorization, provenance, and completion records
across MCP, A2A, and HTTP [36]. It carries a budget_usd ceiling that attenuates along a token
chain, but treats that value as a per-token authorization ceiling rather than a running balance; the
runtime remains responsible for aggregate spend enforcement. AATs let a holder derive a signed
chain with equal-or-narrower tools, arguments, depth, and lifetime without contacting the root is-
suer, while leaving transport binding deployment-specific [32]. Overlaying Governance formalizes
recursive delegation and scope composition over existing policy [18]. These mechanisms prevent
scope amplification. A consumable right adds a different obligation: two children can each hold the
same narrow scope while only one may consume the remaining unit. Offline attenuation alone
cannot decide exclusive ownership.
PAuth derives service-side slices for task-implied concrete operations and binds operand values
to provenance-aware authorization envelopes [44]. It strengthens operation-specific authorization,
but does not define exclusive ownership of consumable budgets, crash/partition credit transfer, or
settlement of an uncertain external effect.
Stateful least privilege makes authorization decisions depend on execution history and repre-
sents policy state as replicated state machines [9]. This establishes stateful cloud authorization as
a deployed security direction. Our state is narrower but structurally different: it tracks exclusive
consumable-credit generations and their effect obligations across an agent delegation DAG.
MCP standardizes model-to-tool connectivity and profiles OAuth authorization; A2A standard-
izes agent discovery and task exchange [1, 30]. MPAC adds multi-principal sessions, intent, opera-
tions, conflicts, Lamport-clock watermarks, optimistic concurrency, and governance [37]. We use
protocol adapters and causal metadata but do not claim a general coordination protocol. The active
individual Internet-Draft on Transaction Tokens for Agents propagates subject, actor, and agentic
context through multi-agent call chains [38]; it specifies neither a running consumable balance
nor exclusive escrow ownership or effect coverage.
2.3
Transactional Effects and Commit-Time Authority
Atomix gives agent tool calls progress-aware transactional semantics. It uses epochs, per-resource
frontiers, delayed commit for bufferable effects, and compensation for externalized effects [31].
Commit-time authorization separately requires fresh, causally prior, effect-bound, eligible author-
ity at the durability boundary [41]. Context-to-Execution Integrity binds protected fields, exact


Fault-Tolerant Budget Conservation in Agent Delegation
5
effects, and invocation authority [40]. These works establish that endpoint success is not enough
and that external effects need a boundary protocol. We add conserved consumable rights across
distributed delegation and keep uncertain effects charged across recovery.
Compensation is useful but weaker than prevention for irreversible payments, messages, disclo-
sures, or physical actions. Sagas explicitly accept application-specific compensation rather than
atomic rollback [12]. Likewise, “exactly once” can conflate delivery, state consistency, and deter-
ministic replay [45]. Our claims are at-most-once settlement and continuous coverage at a mediated
gateway, not exactly-once delivery.
Two recent results sharpen this boundary. Machine-checked dual-write recovery shows that
source-side state alone cannot safely distinguish a missing sink write from a completed one and
formalizes recovery around sink acceptance records and fencing [3]. A cross-runtime study of
agent tool calls similarly finds that exactly-once behavior depends on the model, harness, and tool
contract, and that verification alone does not close late-commit races [28]. Our protocol adopts
that receiver-visible boundary and adds the invariant that every accepted or still uncertain effect
remains covered by exclusive credit.
2.4
Escrow, Numeric Invariants, and Coordination
The Escrow Transactional Method permits concurrent changes while reserving enough rights to
preserve numeric bounds [33]. Bounded Counter conflict-free replicated data types (CRDTs) build
on convergent replicated-data-type semantics and distribute decrement rights so disconnected
replicas can act without violating a lower bound [5, 43]. Just-Right Consistency combines CRDTs,
transactional causal consistency, bounded counters, and static analysis to synchronize only where
application correctness requires it [42]. These are foundational prior art, not our inventions.
Invariant confluence characterizes when valid divergent states can merge without coordina-
tion [4]. The recent Complete CALM criterion states a broader history-based boundary between
monotone specifications and those requiring coordination [16]. A consumable shared unit is non-
monotone: spending in one partition removes an option from another. Our protocol applies the
classical answer–exclusive preallocation–and then adds agent-specific delegation lineage, author-
ity bindings, normalized effects, and settlement obligations.
2.5
Leases, Fencing, and Durable Workflow
Leases provide time-bounded authority under clock and failure assumptions [14]; lock services
use monotonically ordered ownership and durable consensus to coordinate clients [8, 34]. Expiry
does not undo an already dispatched effect. We use an epoch as a fencing generation, never as
evidence that the previous effect did not happen.
Recent capability-coherence work maps authorization revocation to memory consistency and
reports an execution-count bound on post-revocation operations [35]. That revocation bound is
complementary: our epoch fence controls acceptance across ownership generations, while reclaim
also requires exclusive credit ownership and terminal effect evidence.
Durable distributed applications commonly decompose work into idempotent steps, stable re-
quest identifiers, and reconciliation rather than assuming a cross-organization transaction [15].
Stable call identifiers and duplicate suppression trace back to classic RPC semantics [7]; durable
systems additionally need the completion record and protected mutation to share the relevant
atomicity boundary. Linearizability remains the abstraction for an authoritative local transition
[17]; Lamport order supplies causal structure without pretending synchronized clocks determine
truth [24]. Table 1 positions the resulting gap.


6
Zhu and Wang
Work
Consumable
vector
Recursive /
DAG
delegation
Crash +
partition
External-effect
settlement
Primary
contribution
Boundary
relative to this
paper
Agent Contracts
Yes
Recursive
hierarchy
No fault
semantics
evaluated
Between-action
monitor
Resource-
bounded
contract +
allocation law
No
duplicate/late-
effect/fencing
model
Token Budgets
Cost
scalar/object
Fan-out
ownership
In-process focus
Estimator-based
cap
Incident catalog
+ affine Rust case
study
No durable
cross-protocol
recovery
CapLease
Consumable
authorization
state
Delegation
Crash/retry
recovery
Idempotent
receiver contract
Durable
authorization-
state protocol
No partitioned
vector-credit
DAG join/effect-
coverage
theorem
EpochX
Task credits /
bounties
Recursive
delegation
No reported
crash/partition
proof
Lock +
acceptance
settlement
Agent
marketplace and
asset economy
No prefix
ownership/effect-
uncertainty
invariant
AIP / AAT
Reusable scopes
Signed chains
Offline
verification
Invocation +
completion
binding
Identity and
monotone scope
attenuation
No exclusive
consumable
ownership
MPAC
Not central
Multi-principal
graph
Optimistic
conflicts
Operation state
General agent
coordination
No resource
invariant
Atomix
Resource
frontiers
Workflow
branches
Fault injection
Commit +
compensation
Transactional
tool semantics
No delegated
budget
conservation
RIFL / Beldi /
ExoFlow
No budget vector
remote
procedure call
(RPC)/workflow
graph
Crash recovery
Durable
completion /
exactly-once
workflow
Replay-safe
execution
substrates
No
delegated-right
or charge-bound
theorem
Escrow / Bounded
Counter
Numeric rights
Replica rights
graph
Partition-aware
Database update
Numeric
invariant
preservation
No agent
authority/effect
witness
Commit-time
authorization
Not central
Multi-agent
workflow
Controlled
invalidation
Fresh
effect-bound
witness
No resource
transfer/settle-
ment law
This paper
Quantized
vector
Disjoint
lineage in a
task DAG
Crash, retry,
partition, late
completion
Reservation +
authenticated
terminal
evidence
Dual
ledger/effect
conservation
Conditional on
mediated
gateway and
terminal-
evidence
soundness
Table 1. Closest work is complementary. The contribution is not any individual primitive, but a fault-aware
composition that keeps exclusive delegated rights and external-effect obligations coupled.
3
System, Failure, and Threat Model
3.1
Entities and Trust Boundaries
The system contains a root issuer, delegation controllers, agent runtimes, durable branch stores, ef-
fect gateways, a terminal-evidence authority, a reconciler, and an auditor. The issuer authenticates
a task grant and creates the initial budget vector. Controllers split and move rights. Agent models
propose work but cannot mint, settle, or refund credit. Each branch store atomically records local
ownership, reservations, outbox state, and terminal evidence. The effect gateway is the complete-
mediation point for a protected effect. It enforces the canonical operation key and epoch, and
returns or exposes an authoritative outcome.
In the reference profile, the issuer, controller, branch store, gateway, terminal-evidence author-
ity, and reconciler form the declared enforcement trusted computing base (TCB); the controller
and reconciler are trusted orchestration but still cannot bypass store/gateway validation. A deploy-
ment may remove those two orchestrators from the TCB only if every request is independently


Fault-Tolerant Budget Conservation in Agent Delegation
7
Root issuer
grant + budget vector
Delegation controller
exclusive split / transfer
Branch store
credit + reservation + outbox
Untrusted agent
plan / delegate / retry
Effect gateway
idempotency + fence + effect
External receiver
durable domain state
Evidence authority
signed success / no-effect
Reconciler
query / settle / retire
Independent audit verifier
trace + conservation totals
proposal
decision
reserved dispatch
read-only evidence export
declared trusted enforcement envelope
Fig. 2. Reference architecture and declared trust boundary. The untrusted agent may propose and retry;
only the trusted branch store can move budget state. Protected external effects pass through a gateway
whose authenticated outcome drives idempotent settlement. The independent verifier is a read-only evidence
consumer outside the safety TCB.
revalidated at the authoritative store or gateway. The gateway’s enforcement verifier is therefore
distinct from the read-only independent audit verifier shown outside the boundary.
Figure 2 shows the reference boundary. The network and agent data plane are untrusted. The
issuer need not be online for every local spend: partition-local availability derives from credit
already escrowed to that branch. Cross-zone transfer, reclaim, or expansion can require an online
coordinator.
3.2
Budget and Effect Surfaces
The protected budget is a finite vector over dimensions 𝒦: currency quanta, paid API calls, risk
units, recipient-specific disclosures, or effect counts. Each dimension has an authenticated unit,
quantization, and maximum-charge rule. Cross-dimension exchange is disallowed unless a sepa-
rately authorized conversion contract is present; otherwise a dollar cannot silently substitute for
a risk unit.
Protected effects include any mediated external state change whose authority is consumable: a
payment, message, credential issuance, infrastructure write, record mutation, disclosure, or paid
call. Pure reads may still consume an API or disclosure budget. The normalizer maps protocol-
specific requests to a canonical effect descriptor. Effects outside the declared gateway envelope,
including covert channels and direct credentials, are outside the theorem.
3.3
Failure Model
The network is asynchronous. Messages can be lost, duplicated, delayed, reordered, or delivered
after an arbitrary partition. Processes can crash and restart, losing volatile state while preserving
completed durable commits. We do not use wall-clock order to infer whether an effect happened.
Clocks are used only for policy expiry under a stated deployment profile; epochs and authoritative
terminal evidence determine settlement.
The model includes concurrent fan-out and fan-in, duplicate delegation and dispatch, retries,
crash before or after each durable write, response loss, timeout followed by late completion, branch


8
Zhu and Wang
partition and healing, stale epoch messages, repeated terminal evidence, and recovery scans. It
excludes Byzantine consensus and arbitrary corruption inside a trusted durable store.
3.4
Adversary
The planner, model, tool description, retrieved content, and downstream agent may be malicious or
confused. They can request overlapping child budgets, replay messages, alias a reservation across
effects, relabel effects, trigger retry storms, construct joins with shared ancestry, withhold com-
pletion, and present stale epochs. They cannot forge issuer or terminal-evidence signatures, break
collision-resistant digests, bypass the protected gateway, or directly mutate the trusted store under
the main theorem.
3.5
Assumptions
Assumption 1 (Authenticated Roots and cRedits). Root grants, credit generations, controller
identities, and protocol bindings are unforgeable and domain-separated.
Assumption 2 (DuRable local lineaRization). Each branch transition atomically updates
credit, operation, outbox, and audit records in one durable local transaction.
Assumption 3 (Unie Root issuance and stable decisions). Each root generation is issued
once. Local split, join, reservation, settlement, and successor-generation decision keys are linearized
by their authoritative store. In particular, one write-once (𝑔, 𝜒𝑐, 𝑐𝑖𝑑, 𝜂𝑐, reissue) decision, whose pre-
decessor epoch comes from the authenticated credit record rather than a caller parameter, selects at
most one successor pair (𝜂+, 𝑐+). Each cross-store transfer ID has one monotone decision register whose
value can change from pending to exactly one of accepted or cancelled. Exclusive ownership is a
protocol invariant to be proved, not part of this assumption.
Assumption 4 (Sound effect boundaRy). All protected paths are normalized to the correct re-
source dimensions and effect identity before dispatch.
Assumption 5 (Fenced idempotent gateway). For each receiver-scoped key, gateway accep-
tance, fence installation, effect record creation, and terminal outcome have one linearization order.
The gateway selects the authoritative epoch and fence by the authenticated (𝑔, 𝜒𝑐) committed inside
the operation key and 𝛽𝑜. The gateway rejects a not-yet-accepted stale generation, treats a canonical
operation key as unique within the receiver namespace, rejects any changed binding under that key,
and treats exact replay idempotently. A request accepted before a fence may complete afterward and
remains queryable; the fence prevents only a new old-generation acceptance. The gateway revalidates
the bound domain precondition and commit-time witness immediately before acceptance.
Assumption 6 (Maximum-chaRge contRact). For endpoint profile 𝜒, a trusted function
RequiredCap(𝑒, 𝜒) returns a conservative vector. Reservation requires RequiredCap(𝑒, 𝜒) ⪯u𝑜, and
the gateway prevents the complete actual charge of the accepted effect instance from exceeding u𝑜. If
no such cap can be enforced, the hard-bound profile is unsupported.
Assumption 7 (TeRminal-evidence completeness and non-eivocation). Authenticated
terminal evidence is a tagged success receipt or no-effect certificate. Both bind the operation ID and
key, complete acceptance digest 𝛽𝑜, root, logical slot and credit lineage, epoch, effect digest, receiver,
outcome, issuer, and signature. A success receipt additionally binds the unique instance ID, gateway
acceptance sequence, and complete actual charge no greater than the reservation. A no-effect certificate
instead binds a receiver-installed fenceEpoch > 𝜂𝑜. The authority does not sign conflicting terminal
variants. A success receipt exists only for the unique effect instance accepted under that exact 𝛽𝑜. A
no-effect certificate may be issued only when the exact (𝑔𝑜, 𝜒𝑜, 𝜅𝑜, 𝛽𝑜, 𝜂𝑜) binding never linearized


Fault-Tolerant Budget Conservation in Agent Delegation
9
Fault or attack
Naive failure
Required mechanism
Safe consequence
Concurrent
fan-out
Two children copy
one remainder
Exclusive atomic split with
stable operation ID
Inputs consumed once;
duplicate is a stutter
Multi-parent join
Shared ancestor
counted twice
Disjoint lineage test and
atomic input consumption
Alias rejected; distinct
inputs may merge
Duplicate
dispatch
Effect executes
twice
Canonical effect key at
fenced gateway
Replay returns same
outcome
Response loss
Timeout interpreted
as failure
Durable obligation and
indeterminate state
Credit stays reserved
Crash after effect
Ledger misses
consumption
Authenticated receipt query
and idempotent settlement
Recovery moves reservation
once
Stale worker
Old owner spends
reclaimed credit
Monotone epoch and
gateway fence
Old generation rejected
Network partition
Both sides spend
cached total
Preallocated exclusive
escrow
Each component spends
only its rights
Unknown
receiver
Fabricated “no
effect” proof
Evidence authority or
permanent retirement
No unsafe automatic refund
Table 2. Failure semantics. Safety may reduce availability or strand budget; the protocol reports that cost
rather than hiding it as successful execution.
GatewayAccept; it proves both non-acceptance/non-occurrence and that its installed fence makes
every future occurrence under that binding impossible. A fence does not cancel an already accepted
request.
Assumption 8 (AdapteR Refinement). MCP, A2A, HTTP, and runtime adapters preserve canon-
ical operation and transfer identifiers, root, logical slot, credit lineage and footprint commitments,
source and operation labels, resource and maximum-charge vectors, selector schema version, epoch,
𝜅, 𝛽𝑜, normalized effect and receiver, joint witness, and every terminal-evidence binding and commit-
ted/remainder footprint commitment used by the abstract transition.
Assumption 9 (Complete mediation). An agent cannot reach a protected effect with credentials
or a path outside the branch store and effect gateway.
3.6
Goals and Explicit Non-Goals
The safety goals are global ledger conservation, descendant non-amplification, at-most-once settle-
ment, continuous injective effect coverage, a root-bounded external exposure vector, stale-epoch
rejection, late-completion safety, and partition confinement. Concrete trace lifting is a separate
implementation proof obligation. Liveness is conditional: an online branch with sufficient local
escrow and a responsive gateway can progress without contacting the root issuer. A permanently
partitioned, escrow-exhausted branch can safely refuse forever.
The paper does not optimize allocation, predict token or price use, guarantee receiver honesty
beyond Assumption 7, reverse completed effects, provide exactly-once network delivery, tolerate
Byzantine infrastructure, conceal accounting data from the evidence plane, or establish production
service-level objectives (SLOs).


10
Zhu and Wang
4
Why Simpler Mechanisms Fail
4.1
Allocation Conservation Is Not Prefix Conservation
The static condition
∑
𝑖∈children(𝑝)
𝑏𝑖≤𝑏𝑝
checks one allocation snapshot. It says nothing about whether an old child still owns 𝑏𝑖after a
refund, whether the same request was applied twice, or whether an external effect already con-
sumed the allocation. The property we require holds for every execution prefix and accounts for
in-flight and uncertain obligations.
4.2
Read–Check–Decrement Replicas Double Spend
If two partitioned branches read a global remaining value 1, both can locally verify 1 ≥1 and
decrement. Last-writer-wins convergence can produce the valid-looking final value 0 after two
effects. CRDT convergence is not invariant preservation; unrestricted decrement is not invariant-
confluent [4]. Exclusive rights make each local decrement monotone with respect to ownership.
4.3
Static Splitting Is Safe but Can Strand Utility
Giving each of 𝑛possible workers 𝐵/𝑛before execution prevents double-spend, but idle branches
strand capacity and dynamic fan-out requires worst-case over-reservation. Token Budgets mea-
sures this cost in its setting [22]. Our protocol retains the safety of static escrow while allowing
coordinated, idempotent transfer and return. It does not pretend that reallocation remains avail-
able through every partition.
4.4
Timeout Refund Creates a Late-Completion Race
Let an operation be dispatched before time 𝑡, let no response arrive by 𝑡+ Δ, and let the controller
refund. There are two executions indistinguishable to the controller at 𝑡+ Δ: one in which the
gateway never executed and one in which it executed but the response is delayed. A refund is safe
in the first and unsafe in the second. No timeout value resolves the information gap. The system
needs a fenced, authoritative no-effect proof or must retain/retire the reservation.
4.5
Idempotency Keys Do Not Allocate Authority
A stable request key can stop the same receiver from applying one effect twice. It does not stop
two different operation keys from spending the same credit, a relabeled path from creating the
same normalized effect, or two receivers from interpreting keys in different namespaces. The key
must be bound to one credit generation, effect digest, receiver, epoch, and maximum charge, and
the gateway must enforce that binding.
4.6
Scope Attenuation Does Not Consume
A scope token answers which operations a child may invoke. It can be copied to two children with-
out widening the scope set, yet both children may spend the last dollar. Scope non-amplification
and resource conservation are orthogonal. We compose with AIP/AAT-style identity and attenua-
tion rather than replacing them.


Fault-Tolerant Budget Conservation in Agent Delegation
11
4.7
Compensation Is Not Conservation
A Saga can schedule a refund after a duplicated purchase, but the duplicate effect occurred and
compensation can fail, cost money, or be semantically incomplete. Compensation is a valid re-
covery policy for designated effects; it is not evidence that the authorization budget was never
exceeded. We record compensation as a further effect with its own authority and accounting.
4.8
Independent Correct Components Can Compose Incorrectly
An allocation service, idempotent gateway, lease manager, and receipt verifier can each be locally
correct while disagreeing on operation identity or epoch. For example, a gateway may deduplicate
on an HTTP key while the ledger retries under a new operation ID; or a lease manager may fence
the branch while the receiver accepts the old generation. The protocol therefore requires one joint
canonical binding and a concrete-to-abstract refinement contract.
4.9
The Joint Conditions Are Individually Necessary
The external bound is not obtained by merely placing familiar components next to one another. It
uses four cross-component conditions on the same canonical operation:
𝒥= ExclusiveOwnership ∧InstanceInjectivity ∧CompleteCharge ∧FenceOrdering.
Each conjunct has a one-unit counterexample if omitted while the others are retained:
(1) without exclusive ownership, two branches reserve the same atom under distinct valid keys
and each produces one correctly receipted effect;
(2) without instance injectivity, one valid reservation and key produces two distinct receiver in-
stances while only one operation remains in the ledger;
(3) without complete charge, the gateway enforces a cap of one but a receipt reports zero for a
one-unit effect, so internal settlement is conserved while actual cost is not; and
(4) without fence ordering, an old request can be accepted after its atom is reissued, then both the
old and successor operations complete.
Consequently, bounded counters alone do not imply effect conservation, and durable comple-
tion records alone do not imply delegated-right conservation. The contribution proved below is
the composition: 𝒥, together with persist-before-exposure and complete mediation, turns exact
ownership partition into the external exposure bound in Equation (11).
5
Formal Budget and Delegation Model
5.1
Resource Vectors and Labels
Let 𝒦be a finite set of authenticated resource dimensions. A budget is a vector b ∈ℕ|𝒦|. We use
componentwise order, addition, and partial subtraction:
x ⪯y ⟺∀𝑘∈𝒦∶𝑥𝑘≤𝑦𝑘,
ẏ −x is defined iff x ⪯y.
Quantization is explicit. A currency dimension may use cents; an effect count uses integer events.
The abstract results extend to cancellative commutative resource monoids with decidable subre-
source, but the executable profile uses finite natural vectors.
A resource label
𝜆= (𝑔, 𝜏, 𝑝, purpose, audience, effectClass, 𝑡exp, 𝑣)
binds root grant 𝑔, task atom 𝜏, principal 𝑝, purpose, recipient/audience, effect class, expiry, and
policy version. The relation 𝜆′ ⊑𝜆means that every behavior denoted by 𝜆′ is permitted by 𝜆. It
is a partial order. Delegation requires both quantitative and semantic attenuation:


12
Zhu and Wang
bchild ⪯bparent,
𝜆child ⊑𝜆parent.
(3)
An authenticated conversion contract is required to exchange dimensions. In its absence all
conservation equations are componentwise and no conversion is defined.
Expiry and policy-version currency are evaluated as external predicates in the commit-time
witness. The budget-ownership machine does not infer trusted time or independently prove policy
freshness.
5.2
Root Rights and Compressed Footprints
Definition 1 (Root Right univeRse). For root grant 𝑔with issued vector B𝑔, define
𝑈𝑔= ⨄
𝑘∈𝒦
{(𝑔, 𝑘, 𝑗) ∣1 ≤𝑗≤𝐵𝑔,𝑘}.
Each element is a logical consumable right in one dimension. It need not be materialized; an imple-
mentation may represent contiguous ranges, rights matrices, or balance certificates.
For 𝑋⊆𝑈𝑔, let
vec(𝑋)𝑘= |{(𝑔, 𝑘, 𝑗) ∈𝑋}|.
Sets make aliasing explicit. A split partitions one footprint; a join unions only pairwise-disjoint
footprints. Numeric balances are a compressed implementation of this ownership semantics.
5.3
Credits and the Delegation DAG
Definition 2 (CRedit geneRation). A credit generation is
𝑐= ⟨𝑐𝑖𝑑, 𝑔, 𝜒𝑐, owner, 𝑃𝑐, 𝑋𝑐, 𝜆𝑐, 𝜂𝑐, 𝜎𝑐⟩
where 𝑐𝑖𝑑is the generation identifier, 𝜒𝑐is the stable logical slot (reissue-chain) identifier, 𝑃𝑐is a finite
set of parent generations, 𝑋𝑐⊆𝑈𝑔is its currently available footprint, 𝜆𝑐⊑𝜆𝑔, 𝜂𝑐is a monotonically
ordered epoch, and 𝜎𝑐∈{active, closing, closed} is its lifecycle status. Its available vector is a𝑐=
vec(𝑋𝑐). A reissue preserves 𝜒𝑐while creating a fresh 𝑐𝑖𝑑and higher epoch; a split or join creates fresh
logical slots for its output credits. Consequently, disjoint split siblings may be current concurrently.
For state 𝑠, let ActiveGeneration𝑠(𝑔, 𝜒) denote the credit authority’s current-generation register
for logical slot (𝑔, 𝜒). The current-generation predicate is
Current𝑠(𝑐, 𝜂) ⟺𝜎𝑐= active ∧𝜂= 𝜂𝑐
∧𝜂= AuthoritativeEpoch𝑠(𝑔, 𝜒𝑐)
∧ActiveGeneration𝑠(𝑔, 𝜒𝑐) = 𝑐𝑖𝑑.
(4)
Uniqueness is therefore per logical reissue chain, not per root, owner, or authority. It prevents
two generations of the same slot from being spendable without forbidding independently owned,
pairwise-disjoint sibling slots. This predicate never substitutes for ownership: every ownership-
moving action also requires its referenced input footprint to have exactly the stated singleton raw
source tag. For dispatch that source is R(𝑜), not the credit’s remaining available footprint.
The task graph 𝒢𝑇= (𝑉𝑇, 𝐸𝑇) may be a DAG. The credit-lineage graph 𝒢𝐶is also acyclic, but its
edges have resource semantics. A multi-parent credit can be created only by Join, which consumes
pairwise-disjoint inputs atomically. Thus a task node may depend on two branches without owning
both branches’ budgets; dependency is not ownership.


Fault-Tolerant Budget Conservation in Agent Delegation
13
Definition 3 (Lineage-disjoint join). For current inputs 𝑐1, … , 𝑐𝑚, a join is admissible only if
∀𝑖≠𝑗∶𝑋𝑐𝑖∩𝑋𝑐𝑗= ∅
∧
𝑚
⋀
𝑖=1
Current𝑠(𝑐𝑖, 𝜂𝑐𝑖)
∧
∃𝑔⋆∀𝑖∶𝑔𝑐𝑖= 𝑔⋆,
and the branch store can consume all inputs in one authoritative transition. The output is a same-root
credit 𝑐′ with 𝑔𝑐′ = 𝑔⋆and footprint ⋃𝑖𝑋𝑐𝑖; its label must be an authenticated common lower bound,
∀𝑖∶𝜆′ ⊑𝜆𝑐𝑖. We do not assume that the label partial order has a greatest lower bound.
The set representation prevents two aliases of one ancestor from being added. In a compressed
implementation, each transfer certificate carries a lineage commitment and a disjointness witness
checked against durable spent/transfer records.
5.4
Transfers
A cross-store delegation cannot atomically debit one database and credit another without a dis-
tributed transaction. We represent a durable handoff
𝑥= ⟨𝑥𝑖𝑑, 𝑐𝑠, src, dst, 𝑋𝑥, 𝜆𝑥, 𝜂𝑠, 𝜎𝑥⟩.
The source atomically removes 𝑋𝑥from 𝑋𝑐𝑠and records 𝜎𝑥= sealed. Those atoms are in transit:
neither source nor destination may spend them.
Every 𝑥𝑖𝑑has one monotone decision register
𝛿[𝑥𝑖𝑑] ∈{pending, accepted(𝑑𝑠𝑡, 𝑐𝑖𝑑), cancelled(𝑠𝑟𝑐)}.
(5)
The compare-and-set from pending to accepted is the logical ownership switch to the uniquely
named destination child; a crash after that decision is recovered by materializing the same child
row, which is an abstract stutter. Source cancellation requires a destination-exclusion proof and a
compare-and-set from pending to cancelled; that decision logically restores the source, and later
row finalization only materializes it. Thus accept and cancel cannot both become terminal, and stale
source or destination rows never override the decision register. If no shared decision authority or
exclusion protocol is available, cancellation is disabled and the rights remain in T. Timeout is never
a decision.
5.5
Operations, Effects, and Terminal Evidence
Throughout, 𝐻(tag ∥⋯) denotes a collision-resistant, domain-separated hash over one length-
prefixed canonical encoding. Maps and sets have deterministic key/element order, integers have
a single representation, and strings have a fixed Unicode normalization. 𝐻(𝑃𝑐) and 𝐻(𝑋𝑜) may be
verified lineage and rights commitments rather than materialized sets, but their opening/verifica-
tion contract must bind exactly the modeled values.
Definition 4 (NoRmalized effect). A normalized effect is
𝑒= ⟨class, resource, subject, receiver, payloadDigest, domainPrecondition⟩.
The function Normalize maps a protocol-specific proposal and current domain state to 𝑒. Effect-
equivalent MCP, A2A, HTTP, shell, or browser paths share the same digest under the deployment’s
effect contract.
Definition 5 (Effect instance). An effect descriptor is a template; an occurrence is a distinct
instance
𝜄= ⟨𝑖𝑖𝑑, gateway, receiver, 𝜅, 𝛽, ℎ𝑒, acceptSeq⟩.
The acceptance sequence is assigned by the gateway’s per-key linearization domain, and 𝛽is the com-
plete accepted-operation binding defined below. The one-effect profile permits at most one 𝑖𝑖𝑑for a


14
Zhu and Wang
canonical key. If an endpoint commits a bundle atomically, the entire bundle is one normalized in-
stance and its receipt reports the bundle’s complete charge. For a terminal instance, ActualCharge(𝜄) is
the unique resource vector assigned to that complete instance by the trusted charge contract; Assump-
tion 7 requires the committed receipt to report exactly this vector. It is not inferred from an agent’s
estimate or a partial stream observation.
Definition 6 (OpeRation ReseRvation). An operation is
𝑜= ⟨𝑜𝑖𝑑, 𝑔, 𝜒𝑐, 𝑐𝑖𝑑, 𝜂𝑐, 𝜅, 𝑒, ℎ𝑒, 𝑋𝑜, u, 𝜆𝑜, Φ𝑜, 𝜈sel, 𝜎𝑜⟩,
where 𝑜𝑖𝑑is a stable operation ID. The source credit is 𝑐𝑜; we write 𝑔𝑜= 𝑔𝑐𝑜, 𝜒𝑜= 𝜒𝑐𝑜, 𝑐𝑖𝑑𝑜= 𝑐𝑖𝑑𝑐𝑜, and
𝜂𝑜= 𝜂𝑐𝑜, while the unsubscripted source fields displayed in the tuple denote those same immutable
values. Moreover,
𝜅= 𝐻(op ∥𝑖𝑠𝑠𝑢𝑒𝑟∥𝑔∥𝑐𝑖𝑑∥𝑜𝑖𝑑∥𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑒𝑖𝑣𝑒𝑟∥ℎ𝑒)
is its receiver-scoped canonical idempotency/query key. The collision- resistant, domain-separated
derivation makes a key name one operation binding within the threat model; 𝜅is not an agent-chosen
alias. Here 𝑒and ℎ𝑒are the normalized effect and digest, 𝑋𝑜is an exclusively reserved footprint,
u = vec(𝑋𝑜) is the maximum charge, 𝜆𝑜⊑𝜆𝑐, Φ𝑜is the joint authorization witness, and 𝜎𝑜is the
operation phase. 𝜈sel names the immutable deterministic footprint-selector schema used if a successful
receipt reports a partial charge.
The gateway does not accept a loose collection of fields. It linearizes the domain-separated digest
𝛽𝑜= 𝐻(accept ∥𝑜𝑖𝑑∥𝑔∥𝜒𝑐∥𝑐𝑖𝑑∥𝜂𝑐∥𝜅∥𝐻(𝑃𝑐) ∥𝐻(𝑋𝑜)
∥ℎ𝑒∥𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑒𝑖𝑣𝑒𝑟∥u ∥𝐻(𝜆𝑐) ∥𝐻(𝜆𝑜) ∥𝐻(Φ𝑜) ∥𝜈sel).
(6)
Thus the root, logical slot, source lineage, generation, reserved rights, semantic ceiling, effect, re-
ceiver, maximum charge, selector schema, and commit witness compared by Covered are fields of
one authenticated acceptance binding rather than implicit attributes of 𝜄.
The operation phases are:
reserved ∶
durable obligation and outbox exist; dispatch not known to begin,
indeterminate ∶
dispatch may have crossed the effect boundary,
committed ∶
authoritative success receipt applied by one terminal decision,
verified-aborted ∶
durable local non-dispatch proof or authoritative no-effect certificate,
forfeited ∶
rights permanently unavailable; uncertainty is not refunded.
Dispatch moves reserved to indeterminate before or atomically with exposing work to the
gateway. A synchronous success can proceed directly to settlement, but a crash at any cut leaves
a durable reservation or indeterminate obligation.
Definition 7 (Authenticated teRminal evidence). Externally authenticated terminal evi-
dence is the tagged sum
𝜖∶∶= 𝑟+ ∣𝜋¬𝑒,
where
𝑟+ = ⟨𝑟𝑖𝑑, 𝑜𝑖𝑑, 𝑖𝑖𝑑, acceptSeq, 𝜅, 𝛽𝑜, 𝑔, 𝜒𝑐,
𝑐𝑖𝑑, 𝜂𝑐, ℎ𝑒, receiver, d, committed, 𝑡, issuer, signature⟩,
𝜋¬𝑒= ⟨𝑝𝑖𝑑, 𝑜𝑖𝑑, 𝜅, 𝛽𝑜, 𝑔, 𝜒𝑐, 𝑐𝑖𝑑, 𝜂𝑐,
ℎ𝑒, receiver, fenceEpoch, verified-no-effect, 𝑡, issuer, signature⟩.
Verify+(𝑟+, 𝑜) holds only when every binding agrees, the issuer is trusted for the receiver, the signature
is valid, 0 ⪯d ⪯u𝑜, and d = ActualCharge(𝜄) for the identified gateway instance. Verify¬𝑒(𝜋¬𝑒, 𝑜)


Fault-Tolerant Budget Conservation in Agent Delegation
15
additionally requires exact (𝑔𝑜, 𝜒𝑜, 𝜅𝑜, 𝛽𝑜, 𝜂𝑜) agreement, a trusted proof authority, and fenceEpoch >
𝜂𝑜installed for the same (𝑔𝑜, 𝜒𝑜) at the receiver, and establishes the permanent non-acceptance/non-
occurrence condition in Assumption 7. Let Verifyterm(𝜖, 𝑜) select the appropriate variant verifier. Nei-
ther variant may substitute for the other.
A fused local recovery transaction additionally admits a distinct durable non-dispatch witness
𝜋local = ⟨𝑙𝑖𝑑, 𝑜𝑖𝑑, 𝜅, 𝛽𝑜, 𝑔, 𝜒𝑐, 𝑐𝑖𝑑, 𝜂𝑐, ℎ𝑒, outboxSeq,
𝐻(outboxRow), never-dispatchable, 𝑡, issuer, authenticator⟩.
LocalNoDispatchPre𝑠(𝜋local, 𝑜) holds only when all immutable operation and acceptance-binding
fields agree; the issuer and authenticator identify the authoritative durable operation store; and the
named outbox row’s authenticated monotone history has never reached dispatchable. The protected
send path accepts only rows carrying an earlier durable dispatchable marker. Define
Verifylocal(𝜋local, 𝑜, 𝑠, 𝑠′) ⟺LocalNoDispatchPre𝑠(𝜋local, 𝑜)
∧Outbox𝑠′[𝑜𝑖𝑑] = local-abort
∧PersistedLocal𝑠′(𝜋local, 𝑜).
PersistedLocal𝑠′ means that the authoritative store persisted and authenticated the witness in that
same serialized commit. The absorbing post-state permanently prevents later dispatch; this witness
is therefore not a textual worker assertion. Define the full terminal-outcome witness type and the
return-only subtype
𝜔∶∶= 𝑟+ ∣𝜋¬𝑒∣𝜋local,
𝜁∶∶= 𝜋¬𝑒∣𝜋local.
Thus 𝜖remains external signed evidence, whereas 𝜔is the closed tagged sum used by a fused terminal-
and-successor transaction.
For every supported selector schema 𝜈sel, fix a public total order ≺𝑔,𝜈sel on the atoms of each root
and dimension. For fixed 𝑔, 𝑋⊆𝑈𝑔, and d ⪯vec(𝑋), define
Take𝜈sel(𝑋, d) = ⋃
𝑘∈𝒦
First𝑑𝑘(𝑋∩{(𝑔, 𝑘, 𝑗) ∣𝑗≥1}, ≺𝑔,𝜈sel).
Here First𝑛(𝑌, ≺) is the set of the 𝑛least elements of finite 𝑌; its existence in every dimension
follows from d ⪯vec(𝑋). Thus 𝐷𝑜= Take𝜈sel(𝑋𝑜, d𝑟+) is not re-chosen after a crash or software
upgrade. The terminal decision atomically persists commitments to both 𝐷𝑜and 𝑋𝑜∖𝐷𝑜. A con-
forming implementation uses this version-bound partition; persisting the charge vector alone is
insufficient for atom-level lineage refinement.
Write 𝑐⪯lin 𝑐′ when 𝑐= 𝑐′ or an authenticated directed path in 𝒢𝐶leads from 𝑐to 𝑐′. For
a source credit 𝑐𝑜and candidate terminal ownership transition 𝑠→𝑠′, let Succ𝑠→𝑠′(𝑐𝑜) contain
(i) 𝑐𝑜, or its authenticated same-lineage successor, only when that target is current in both states,
and (ii) a fresh same-authority child that is absent in 𝑠and created with 𝑃𝑐𝑟= {𝑐𝑜}, a fresh logical
slot 𝜒𝑐𝑟, and the unique current generation for that slot in 𝑠′ by this same transition. It may also
contain (iii) the fresh same-slot successor 𝑐𝑟= 𝑐+ created by TerminalRollover, but only when that
same atomic action satisfies Equations (17)–(18), closes 𝑐𝑜, and installs 𝑐+ as current for (𝑔, 𝜒𝑐𝑜).
Every member satisfies 𝑐𝑜⪯lin 𝑐𝑟; the set never contains an ancestor, unrelated credit, or accepted-
transfer destination. Define the transition predicate
ReturnTarget(𝑜, 𝑐𝑟, 𝑠, 𝑠′) ⟺𝑔𝑐𝑟= 𝑔𝑜∧𝑐𝑟∈Succ𝑠→𝑠′(𝑐𝑜) ∧𝑐𝑜⪯lin 𝑐𝑟
∧Current𝑠′(𝑐𝑟, 𝜂𝑐𝑟)
∧Authority(𝑐𝑟) = SettlementAuthority(𝑜) ∧𝜆𝑐𝑟⊑𝜆𝑐𝑜.
(7)


16
Zhu and Wang
The terminal decision row binds 𝑐𝑟before the concrete ownership update; both become visible in
one atomic commit, so the abstract machine exposes no intermediate state. Returning capacity to
a broader ancestor or another store is a subsequent sealed Delegate transition, not an implicit side
effect of settlement.
A governance receipt saying “policy allowed” is not an effect receipt. A model- or agent-reported
token count is not authoritative unless the resource contract designates that reporter. The guaran-
tee tiers are:
(1) fenced, idempotent, queryable receiver: ledger and mediated effect coverage;
(2) receipt-producing but non-idempotent receiver: no unsafe refund after ambiguity, possibly per-
manent forfeiture; and
(3) agent self-report only: internal ledger integrity, not actual cost/effect conservation.
5.6
Ownership State
The ownership state is not typed as a total location function. It contains six raw relations that
could, in an invalid state, overlap or omit a right:
𝒜𝑠⊆𝑈𝑔× 𝒞,
𝒯𝑠⊆𝑈𝑔× Transfers,
ℛ𝑠⊆𝑈𝑔× 𝒪,
𝒬𝑠⊆𝑈𝑔× 𝒪,
𝒞𝑠⊆𝑈𝑔× 𝒪,
ℱ𝑠⊆𝑈𝑔× 𝒪.
The letters denote available credit, sealed transfer, reserved operation, indeterminate/quarantined
operation, committed consumption, and forfeited capacity created by the Retire action. For a
tagged relation, let
supp(𝑍𝑠) = {𝑢∣∃𝑧∶(𝑢, 𝑧) ∈𝑍𝑠}
and define the candidate-location multiset
Own𝑠(𝑢) = {A(𝑐) ∶(𝑢, 𝑐) ∈𝒜𝑠} ⊎{T(𝑥) ∶(𝑢, 𝑥) ∈𝒯𝑠}
⊎{R(𝑜) ∶(𝑢, 𝑜) ∈ℛ𝑠} ⊎{Q(𝑜) ∶(𝑢, 𝑜) ∈𝒬𝑠}
⊎{C(𝑜) ∶(𝑢, 𝑜) ∈𝒞𝑠} ⊎{F(𝑜) ∶(𝑢, 𝑜) ∈ℱ𝑠}.
A conflicting distinct tag or cross-relation overlap therefore produces two candidates rather than
being hidden by a function type. Byte-identical physical replicas of one logical row abstract to one
relation member and are governed by the store’s uniqueness key. Only after ownership partition
is proved do we write loc𝑠(𝑢) for the unique element of Own𝑠(𝑢).
Bucket vectors are computed from the raw supports:
A𝑔(𝑠) = vec(supp(𝒜𝑠)),
… ,
F𝑔(𝑠) = vec(supp(ℱ𝑠)).
Within one relation, the protocol invariant also requires a right to have at most one tag. The support
deliberately measures resource mass rather than tag multiplicity; all conservation equalities use it
only after Own𝑠(𝑢) has established the ownership partition. Competing tags are detected by Own,
not by supp.
The target invariant is:
A𝑔+ T𝑔+ R𝑔+ Q𝑔+ C𝑔+ F𝑔= B𝑔.
(8)
Tracking F𝑔matters. If crash or distrust permanently strands a right, writing only “consumed
≤𝐵” hides the availability loss. Retirement keeps the equation exact and makes the safety–utility
tradeoff auditable.


Fault-Tolerant Budget Conservation in Agent Delegation
17
5.7
Transition System
The abstract machine starts at
𝒜𝑠0 = 𝑈𝑔× {𝑐𝑔},
A𝑔= B𝑔,
T𝑔= R𝑔= Q𝑔= C𝑔= F𝑔= 0.
For every ownership-moving action, the guard requires Own𝑠(𝑢) = {ℓsrc} for every input atom.
Its authoritative commit removes each source pair and inserts exactly one destination pair in the
same transition. A replay can return the prior decision but cannot execute the relation update
twice. Each transition is atomic at its stated local authority:
Issue(𝑔, B𝑔, 𝜆𝑔).
Create the root credit with a fresh logical slot, status active, and initial epoch 𝜂𝑐; atomically
set AuthoritativeEpoch(𝑔, 𝜒𝑐) = 𝜂𝑐and ActiveGeneration(𝑔, 𝜒𝑐) = 𝑐𝑖𝑑, and assign every atom
in 𝑈𝑔to it.
Split(𝑐, 𝑋1, … , 𝑋𝑚).
Require that 𝑐is the current owner generation at its authoritative epoch, pairwise-disjoint
𝑋𝑖⊆𝑋𝑐, and label attenuation. Remove ⋃𝑖𝑋𝑖from the parent and create children with
pairwise-distinct fresh logical slots and generation identifiers. In the same commit, install
each child as active with matching authoritative-epoch and active-generation registers. If
the parent retains a nonempty available footprint or any outstanding operation/transfer it re-
mains current; only if the action consumes its complete responsibility does it close the parent
and clear that slot’s active-generation register. A stable request ID makes replay a stutter.
Delegate(𝑐, dst, 𝑋, 𝜆′, 𝑥𝑖𝑑).
Atomically move 𝑋⊆𝑋𝑐from A(𝑐) to T(𝑥) and initialize 𝛿[𝑥𝑖𝑑] = pending. AcceptTransfer
wins the decision compare-and-swap (CAS) and logically moves the same atoms to a uniquely
named child credit with a fresh logical slot; CancelTransfer needs an exclusion proof and
the competing CAS to logically restore them to the source. Acceptance atomically installs
the child as active with matching authoritative-epoch and active-generation registers. Later
database-row materialization stutters. The source cannot spend sealed atoms.
Reserve(𝑐, 𝑜, 𝑋, 𝑒).
Require 𝑋⊆𝑋𝑐, current epoch, joint witness, and effect/label compatibility. Atomically move
𝑋from A(𝑐) to R(𝑜) while persisting operation, obligation, outbox, and audit.
Dispatch(𝑜).
Revalidate epoch and witness. Before possible gateway acceptance, move 𝑋𝑜from R(𝑜) to
Q(𝑜). A stale, provably unexposed reservation is returned only through Return(𝑜, 𝜋local),
which installs the absorbing local outbox marker.
GatewayAccept(𝑜).
If the per-key register already contains Accepted[𝜅𝑜] = 𝛽𝑜, return that decision and stutter
regardless of the operation’s later terminal bucket. A different stored binding is rejected. Only
when the key is unseen may first acceptance linearize: require the matching durable dispatch-
able marker and 𝑋𝑜wholly in Q(𝑜) or absorbing F(𝑜), then recompute and atomically accept
the complete immutable digest 𝛽𝑜against the receiver’s key, current witness, and the fence
selected by the authenticated slot (𝑔, 𝜒𝑐). An unexposed reservation or a new old-epoch key
is rejected.
EffectOccurs(𝑜, 𝜄).
Require a prior accepted (𝜅𝑜, 𝛽𝑜) binding and 𝜄.𝛽= 𝛽𝑜; append the fresh instance 𝜄to the
gateway’s monotone observation log. Under the one-effect profile, a second instance for the
same 𝜅𝑜is disabled; transport attempts may duplicate without appending another instance.


18
Zhu and Wang
Settle(𝑜, 𝑟+).
Require 𝑋𝑜wholly in Q(𝑜), a verified success receipt, and 𝜄𝑟+ ∈Obs(𝑠). Derive 𝐷𝑜=
Take𝜈sel(𝑋𝑜, d𝑟+) and persist the exact committed and remainder commitments. Move 𝐷𝑜
to C(𝑜). If 𝑋𝑜∖𝐷𝑜≠∅, require a decision-bound 𝑐𝑟satisfying Equation (7) and move the
remainder there. Settlement never widens the source label, changes the root, jumps to an
ancestor, or resurrects a stale generation. If an identical receipt was already applied, stutter;
any conflicting receipt is rejected.
Return(𝑜, 𝜁).
Require exactly one type-matched branch. The local branch has
𝜁= 𝜋local,
𝑋𝑜wholly in R(𝑜),
Verifylocal(𝜋local, 𝑜, 𝑠, 𝑠′).
The external branch has 𝜁
=
𝜋¬𝑒, 𝑋𝑜wholly in Q(𝑜), and an authoritative fenced
Verify¬𝑒(𝜋¬𝑒, 𝑜) proof that the exact binding was never gateway-accepted and did not
and cannot execute. Also require a decision-bound 𝑐𝑟satisfying Equation (7). Move all 𝑋𝑜
from the branch-specific source to 𝑐𝑟and mark the operation verified-aborted; the local
branch atomically installs the absorbing outbox marker.
Retire(𝑜).
Move an unresolved 𝑋𝑜from Q(𝑜) to F(𝑜). The bucket is absorbing: atoms never become
available or committed. Later evidence annotates the operation’s outcome and actual charge
without moving ownership, so forfeiture remains a conservative maximum charge.
Fence(𝑐, 𝜂′).
For a first installation, require Current𝑠(𝑐, 𝜂𝑐) and 𝜂′ > AuthoritativeEpoch𝑠(𝑔, 𝜒𝑐) = 𝜂𝑐.
Atomically advance the slot’s authoritative epoch, mark 𝑐closing, clear 𝑐𝑖𝑑as its active
generation, and install the same monotone fence at all protected gateways before permitting
new-generation use. An exact already-installed retry stutters. A not-yet-accepted old request
is rejected; a request accepted before the fence may complete later and remains charged/-
queryable.
Reissue(𝑐, 𝜂, 𝜂+, 𝑐+).
Require Equations (14), (15), and (16), require SafeA𝑠(𝑐, 𝜂) = Avail𝑠(𝑐, 𝜂), and require the write-
once reissue decision for the normalized predecessor key (𝑔, 𝜒𝑐, 𝑐𝑖𝑑, 𝜂𝑐, reissue) to select
(𝜂+, 𝑐+), with 𝜂= 𝜂𝑐. In one transaction, persist that decision, mark 𝑐closed, update current-
generation metadata, and move exactly the uniquely available reusable footprint into fresh
generation (𝑐+, 𝜂+) of the same logical slot. Exact replay stutters and a changed target is
rejected. Old committed, forfeited, transferred, or otherwise obligated atoms do not move.
TerminalRollover(𝑜, 𝜔, 𝑐, 𝜂, 𝜂+, 𝑐+).
Apply the fused transition in Equations (17)–(18) only when 𝑜is the final nonterminal op-
eration of the fenced predecessor. In one commit, apply its type-matched terminal-outcome
witness, move the terminal remainder together with the predecessor’s already safe available
footprint into the one normalized reissue target, close the predecessor, and install the same-
slot successor. This is one abstract action, not an implicit relaxation of Settle or Reissue.
Join(𝑐1, … , 𝑐𝑚).
Require Definition 3, no active operations on the input portions, and one atomic authority.
Consume inputs and create one output over their disjoint union with a fresh logical slot.
The same commit closes every fully consumed input and clears its active-generation register,
then installs the output as active with matching authoritative-epoch and active-generation
registers.


Fault-Tolerant Budget Conservation in Agent Delegation
19
5.8
Safety Invariants
For all reachable states, we require:
I1. Ownership partition. |Own𝑠(𝑢)| = 1 for every 𝑢∈𝑈𝑔, including uniqueness of the tag inside
its raw relation.
I2. Non-negative vectors. All bucket vectors are in ℕ|𝒦|.
I3. Semantic attenuation. Every descendant label restricts every lineage ancestor label applica-
ble to its footprint.
I4. Current generation. A split, delegate, reserve, join, or dispatch uses the current owner gen-
eration and epoch.
I5. Operation binding. Each 𝑜𝑖𝑑derives exactly one canonical 𝜅. Within its receiver namespace,
an accepted 𝜅maps to exactly one 𝛽𝑜, which immutably binds 𝑜𝑖𝑑, root, logical slot, footprint
and lineage commitments, epoch, effect digest, receiver, maximum vector, selector schema ver-
sion, source and operation labels, and the joint witness.
I6. Settlement uniqueness. At most one non-conflicting authoritative terminal-evidence variant
is applied to an operation.
I7. Instance injectivity. The monotone gateway log contains at most one effect instance per
canonical key, and one operation covers at most one instance in the one-effect profile.
I8. Dispatch coverage. Every protected dispatch without a terminal verified-no-effect decision
has a durable operation whose atoms are wholly in Q or F, or whose complete committed
receipt accounts for its actual-charge subset in C. A full no-effect return is backed either by
durable never-dispatchable evidence or by authoritative proof that past and future occurrence
is impossible. A partial-success remainder is backed by one complete terminal receipt that
proves the exact actual charge and disables any further instance or charge under (𝜅𝑜, 𝛽𝑜).
I9. No stale resurrection. Advancing an epoch does not make a prior generation current again.
5.9
Effect Instances, Coverage, and External Exposure
The state variable Obs(𝑠) is the gateway’s monotone log of instances appended only by
EffectOccurs. It is a set of 𝜄from Definition 5, not a set of effect descriptors. Thus two separate
payments with identical payloads remain two instances.
The relation Covered(𝜄, 𝑜, 𝑠) is non-recursive. It holds exactly when:
(1) 𝜄.𝜅= 𝜅𝑜, 𝜄.𝛽= 𝛽𝑜, 𝜄.ℎ𝑒= ℎ𝑒𝑜, and the gateway and receiver agree; by Equation (6), equality of 𝛽
also binds root, logical slot, lineage, epoch, footprint, labels, maximum vector, and witness;
(2) 𝑜’s label and commit-time witness were valid at gateway acceptance; and
(3) either 𝑋𝑜remains wholly in Q(𝑜) or F(𝑜), or a complete committed receipt for 𝜄identifies 𝐷𝑜=
Take𝜈sel(𝑋𝑜, ActualCharge(𝜄)) in C(𝑜).
Coverage and instance injectivity are:
∀𝜄∈Obs(𝑠),
∃! 𝑜∈𝒪∶Covered(𝜄, 𝑜, 𝑠),
(9)
Covered(𝜄1, 𝑜, 𝑠) ∧Covered(𝜄2, 𝑜, 𝑠) ⟹𝜄1 = 𝜄2.
(10)
Let Settled𝑔(𝑠) contain exactly the instances whose unique covering operation satisfies 𝑔𝑜= 𝑔
and whose complete receipt has placed its actual-charge footprint in C. Let Risk𝑔(𝑠) = {𝑜∣𝑔𝑜= 𝑔∧
𝑋𝑜is wholly in Q(𝑜) or F(𝑜)}, irrespective of any later evidence annotation. The charged footprints
associated with Settled𝑔and the full footprints associated with Risk𝑔are pairwise disjoint by
ownership location. In particular, a success receipt arriving after forfeiture is recorded for audit
but does not move F, does not enter Settled, and remains charged at the conservative maximum.
The external exposure bound is:


20
Zhu and Wang
∑
𝜄∈Settled𝑔(𝑠)
ActualCharge(𝜄) +
∑
𝑜∈Risk𝑔(𝑠)
u𝑜⪯C𝑔(𝑠) + Q𝑔(𝑠) + F𝑔(𝑠) ⪯B𝑔.
(11)
This is stronger than an internally consistent counter and weaker than a claim about unmediated
physical reality. It additionally depends on the ownership assumptions used by Theorem 1 and on
Assumptions 4, 5, 6, 7, and 9.
5.10
Descendant Capacity
For an execution prefix 𝜌ending in 𝑠, a single-root sub-DAG 𝑊, and a cut separating it from its
ancestors, let In𝜌(𝑊) ⊆𝑈𝑔be the union of exact atom footprints in authenticated ownership
events that crossed from a responsible lineage outside 𝑊to one inside 𝑊along 𝜌. This includes
cross-cut split, accepted transfer, return, successor reissue, and join inputs, and is deduplicated by
atom identity on re-entry. Let Held𝑠(𝑊) include atoms currently available, reserved, indeterminate,
committed, or forfeited in descendants of 𝑊. Descendant non-amplification is:
Held𝑠(𝑊) ⊆In𝜌(𝑊),
vec(Held𝑠(𝑊)) ⪯vec(In𝜌(𝑊)).
(12)
Transfers out of 𝑊leave the left-hand side. A task dependency edge without a credit transfer
contributes no capacity.
6
Fault-Tolerant Delegation and Settlement Protocol
6.1
Design Principles
The protocol follows six rules:
(1) Move quantities and attenuate labels. A child receives both an exclusive footprint and a
narrower-or-equal authorization label.
(2) Persist before exposure. Reservation, obligation, outbox, and audit state commit before a
protected dispatch can escape.
(3) Bind the real effect. The reservation uses a normalized effect digest and current dependen-
cy/authority witness, not a tool name alone.
(4) Treat ambiguity as charged. Response loss produces indeterminate, never automatic re-
fund.
(5) Fence before reuse. Reclaim from an exposed obligation requires a gateway-visible fence and
authoritative evidence that the exact binding was never accepted and did not occur; a fence
alone never releases quarantined rights.
(6) Make replay a stutter. Stable transfer, operation, and terminal-evidence IDs return the prior
decision without repeating state movement.
6.2
Joint Authorization and Budget Witness
The prior research stack supplies complementary predicates over one canonical operation:
ValidWitness(𝑜) ⟺StaticPolicy(𝑜) ∧TaskIntent(𝑜) ∧ProvenanceCeiling(𝑜)
∧SessionLease(𝑜) ∧SafeRoute(𝑜) ∧CurrentClosure(𝑜)
∧NormalizedEffect(𝑜) ∧CurrentCredit(𝑜).
(13)
OpenPort supplies the server-side action boundary [53]. Public work on intent-governed autho-
rization and server-verified action claims supplies concrete examples of the intent and execution
predicates [50, 51]; versioned dependency-closure binding supplies the current recursive skill clo-
sure and normalized effect [52]. The remaining predicates in Equation (13) are explicit interface


Fault-Tolerant Budget Conservation in Agent Delegation
21
assumptions defined by this paper. They are inputs at the witness boundary, not imported conser-
vation results: the exclusive distributed-credit and settlement properties are established here.
6.3
Credit Certificates
A transfer certificate contains:
{
"transfer_id": "...",
"root_grant_id": "...",
"source_credit_id": "...",
"source_epoch": 17,
"destination": "agent://worker-b",
"resource_vector": {"usd_cents": 4000, "api_calls": 6},
"lineage_commitment": "...",
"rights_commitment": "...",
"authorization_label_digest": "...",
"expires_at": "...",
"issuer": "...",
"signature": "..."
}
The destination cannot enlarge the vector or label. The certificate identifies a transfer operation,
not a bearer balance that may be imported repeatedly. Acceptance writes a uniqueness key over
(root, transfer_id).
6.4
Idempotent Delegation
Algorithm 1 performs a sealed cross-store transfer. A local split is its single-authority, no-transit
specialization. The source transition is authoritative for removing spendability. Message send oc-
curs after the durable seal.
If the destination is unreachable, 𝑋remains in T𝑔. Safe cancel is a protocol transition requiring
destination fencing or a durable decision that the transfer cannot later be accepted. The implemen-
tation may instead leave it in transit until reconciliation.
6.5
Reserve Before Dispatch
Algorithm 2 converts available credit to a durable obligation. The maximum vector u must be
known conservatively. If a provider can exceed u without rejection, that provider cannot support
the hard-bound profile.
The explicit R →Q cut is conservative. A crash after the move but before network send can
strand budget until the gateway proves non-execution. Moving after send would create an uncov-
ered effect window. Safety chooses possible stranding.
6.6
Terminal-Evidence Settlement
Algorithm 3 is idempotent and never re-executes the effect. Success consumes the actual vector
and returns only the authenticated remainder. A no-effect certificate returns the full footprint.
Pending or unknown status is not terminal evidence and leaves it in Q.
6.7
Recovery, Reconciliation, and Forfeiture
Algorithm 4 scans operations in reserved or indeterminate. Reserved operations whose outbox
was never made dispatchable can be aborted inside the branch transaction. Once dispatchability


22
Zhu and Wang
Algorithm 1 DelegateEscRow(𝑐, dst, q, 𝜆′, 𝑥𝑖𝑑)
Require: current credit 𝑐, destination, vector, attenuated label, stable transfer ID
1: begin durable source transaction
2: if a decision for 𝑥𝑖𝑑exists then
3:
return the recorded certificate or rejection
4: end if
5: require Current𝑠txn(𝑐, 𝜂𝑐), q ⪯a𝑐, and 𝜆′ ⊑𝜆𝑐
6: choose footprint 𝑋⊆𝑋𝑐with vec(𝑋) = q
7: 𝑋𝑐←𝑋𝑐∖𝑋
8: persist sealed transfer 𝑥= (𝑥𝑖𝑑, 𝑐, dst, 𝑋, 𝜆′, 𝜂𝑐)
9: initialize 𝛿[𝑥𝑖𝑑] = pending; persist outbox and audit; commit
10: send certificate from outbox, retrying with the same 𝑥𝑖𝑑
11: destination verifies signature, epoch, label, and uniqueness
12: destination CASes 𝛿[𝑥𝑖𝑑] ∶pending →accepted(𝑑𝑠𝑡, 𝑐𝑖𝑑′)
13: if the decision is accepted then
14:
atomically create or recover the uniquely named child 𝑐𝑖𝑑′ over 𝑋
15:
source records the terminal decision; it never restores an accepted 𝑋
16:
return accepted child certificate
17: else if the decision is cancelled then
18:
reject import; source may restore 𝑋exactly once
19:
source records the terminal decision
20:
return durable cancellation or rejection status
21: end if
was committed, the reconciler queries the gateway by 𝜅. It applies an authenticated success receipt,
installs a fence and obtains a no-effect proof, or retains uncertainty.
Forfeiture is not a cleanup trick. It records that the system cannot safely reuse the capacity. Later
evidence may annotate a committed outcome and actual charge, but F remains the conservative
maximum and no ownership bucket changes.
6.8
Epoch Fencing and Safe Reclaim
A controller may advance a credit epoch after a worker is lost. The new epoch does not itself
reclaim outstanding rights. We first close the old generation:
For the remainder of this section, Ops(𝑐, 𝜂) and Transfers(𝑐, 𝜂) are monotone historical index
sets: they contain every durably created operation or transfer whose immutable source binding
names credit 𝑐and authenticated epoch 𝜂, including terminal records. They are not filtered “live”
views. SettlementAuthority(𝑜) is the immutable branch authority bound at Reserve that may apply
𝑜’s terminal ownership decision. FenceInstalled𝑠(𝑔, 𝜒, 𝜂+) means every gateway protecting that
root/slot durably enforces a rejection floor of at least 𝜂+. Finally, let
𝐾𝑐= (𝑔, 𝜒𝑐, 𝑐𝑖𝑑, 𝜂𝑐, reissue)
and let Decision𝑠[𝐾𝑐] and TermDecision𝑠[𝑜𝑖𝑑] be partial write-once registers, with ⊥denoting an
unassigned value.


Fault-Tolerant Budget Conservation in Agent Delegation
23
Algorithm 2 ReseRveAndDispatch(𝑐, proposal, u, 𝑜𝑖𝑑)
Require: current credit, proposed protected effect, maximum vector, stable operation ID, sup-
ported selector schema 𝜈sel
1: 𝑒←Normalize(proposal, currentDomainState)
2: ℎ𝑒←𝐻(effect ∥𝑒)
3: compile current joint witness Φ𝑜satisfying Equation (13)
4: require RequiredCap(𝑒, 𝜒) ⪯u
5: derive key 𝜅←𝐻(op ∥𝑖𝑠𝑠𝑢𝑒𝑟∥𝑔∥𝑐𝑖𝑑∥𝑜𝑖𝑑∥𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑒𝑖𝑣𝑒𝑟∥ℎ𝑒)
6: begin durable branch transaction
7: if operation 𝑜𝑖𝑑exists then
8:
require all immutable bindings equal; return recorded state
9: end if
10: require Current𝑠txn(𝑐, 𝜂𝑐), u ⪯a𝑐, Φ𝑜valid, and 𝑒compatible with 𝜆𝑐
11: choose 𝑋𝑜⊆𝑋𝑐with vec(𝑋𝑜) = u
12: derive 𝛽𝑜from the selected 𝑋𝑜and every field in Equation (6)
13: construct the canonical signed operation envelope containing every preimage field of 𝜅and
𝛽𝑜, plus both digests
14: move 𝑋𝑜∶A(𝑐) →R(𝑜)
15: atomically persist operation/obligation with 𝛽𝑜, the exact non-dispatchable envelope in the
outbox, and audit; commit
16: begin dispatch transaction; reload the persisted envelope
17: recompute and require its 𝜅, 𝛽𝑜, signature, and immutable operation binding; recheck
Current𝑠txn(𝑐, 𝜂𝑐) and the persisted Φ𝑜
18: if either check is stale while outbox is provably unexposed then
19:
construct the type-tagged candidate 𝜋local from the persisted operation and outbox row
20:
bind a decision-fixed target descriptor 𝑐return; require this transaction’s before/after states
satisfy Equation (7)
21:
atomically require Verifylocal(𝜋local, 𝑜, 𝑠txn, 𝑠′txn), return 𝑋𝑜to 𝑐return, write the canonical
terminal-decision/audit records, and mark verified-aborted
22:
commit; return the recorded stale-generation rejection
23: end if
24: construct a branch-signed dispatch permit over 𝛽𝑜
25: atomically move 𝑋𝑜∶R(𝑜) →Q(𝑜), persist the permit, and mark the outbox dispatchable;
commit before gateway exposure
26: send only the persisted envelope and permit through the fenced gateway
27: before first acceptance, gateway recomputes 𝜅and 𝛽𝑜, verifies the permit, and revalidates the
bound precondition and current commit witness; an exact accepted replay returns the stored
decision
28: return synchronous success receipt if present; otherwise indeterminate
Closed𝑠(𝑐, 𝜂, 𝜂+) ⟺𝜂= 𝜂𝑐∧𝜂+ = AuthoritativeEpoch𝑠(𝑔, 𝜒𝑐) ∧𝜂+ > 𝜂
∧𝜎𝑐∈{closing, closed} ∧FenceInstalled𝑠(𝑔, 𝜒𝑐, 𝜂+)
∧∀𝑥∈Transfers(𝑐, 𝜂) ∶𝛿[𝑥] ∈{accepted, cancelled}
∧∀𝑜∈Ops(𝑐, 𝜂) ∶𝜎𝑜∈{committed, verified-aborted, forfeited}.
(14)


24
Zhu and Wang
Algorithm 3 SettleOutcome(𝑜, 𝜖)
Require: durable operation 𝑜, candidate terminal evidence 𝜖∈{𝑟+, 𝜋¬𝑒}
1: begin durable branch transaction
2: if 𝑋𝑜is wholly in absorbing F(𝑜) then
3:
require Verifyterm(𝜖, 𝑜)
4:
append or return the idempotent late-evidence annotation
5:
commit; return the unchanged forfeited ownership decision
6: end if
7: if evidence ID or terminal decision for 𝑜𝑖𝑑𝑜was applied then
8:
require byte-equivalent binding; return the prior decision
9: end if
10: require 𝑋𝑜is wholly in Q(𝑜)
11: if 𝜖= 𝑟+ then
12:
require Verify+(𝑟+, 𝑜) and 𝜄𝑟+ ∈Obs(𝑠)
13:
derive 𝐷𝑜←Take𝜈sel(𝑋𝑜, d𝑟+) and bind 𝐻(𝐷𝑜), 𝐻(𝑋𝑜∖𝐷𝑜)
14:
if 𝑋𝑜∖𝐷𝑜≠∅then
15:
bind a decision-fixed target descriptor 𝑐return; require this transaction’s successor state
satisfy Equation (7)
16:
end if
17:
move 𝐷𝑜∶Q(𝑜) →C(𝑜)
18:
if 𝑋𝑜∖𝐷𝑜≠∅then
19:
move 𝑋𝑜∖𝐷𝑜∶Q(𝑜) →A(𝑐return)
20:
end if
21:
mark 𝑜committed and persist 𝑟+/audit atomically
22: else
23:
require 𝜖= 𝜋¬𝑒and Verify¬𝑒(𝜋¬𝑒, 𝑜)
24:
bind a decision-fixed target descriptor 𝑐return; require this transaction’s successor state
satisfy Equation (7)
25:
move 𝑋𝑜∶Q(𝑜) →A(𝑐return)
26:
mark 𝑜verified-aborted and persist 𝜋¬𝑒/audit atomically
27: end if
28: commit; return durable decision
Let SafeA𝑠(𝑐, 𝜂) be the atoms for which the reclaim authority holds a durable proof that
Own𝑠(𝑢) = {A(𝑐)}, together with retained provenance: the atom was idle, returned by a verified
abort or authenticated remainder, or restored after a cancelled transfer. This raw-ownership
condition does not require the fenced old generation itself to remain Current𝑠. An accepted
transfer, a committed atom, and a forfeited atom are excluded. Let
Avail𝑠(𝑐, 𝜂) = {𝑢∈𝑈𝑔∣𝜂= 𝜂𝑐∧Own𝑠(𝑢) = {A(𝑐)}}.
A successor-installing action is enabled only when SafeA𝑠(𝑐, 𝜂) = Avail𝑠(𝑐, 𝜂); otherwise the prede-
cessor remains closing and the unproved capacity is stranded, not silently reclassified as reusable.
The exact reusable footprint is therefore
Reusable𝑠(𝑐, 𝜂, 𝜂+) = {SafeA𝑠(𝑐, 𝜂),
Closed𝑠(𝑐, 𝜂, 𝜂+) ∧SafeA𝑠(𝑐, 𝜂) = Avail𝑠(𝑐, 𝜂),
∅,
otherwise.
(15)


Fault-Tolerant Budget Conservation in Agent Delegation
25
Algorithm 4 RecoveRAndReconcile(𝑜)
Require: durable nonterminal operation 𝑜
1: if 𝑜.𝑝ℎ𝑎𝑠𝑒= reserved and durable outbox proves never dispatchable then
2:
construct the type-tagged candidate 𝜋local
3:
bind a decision-fixed target descriptor 𝑐return; require the atomic transition’s before/after
states satisfy Equation (7)
4:
atomically require Verifylocal(𝜋local, 𝑜, 𝑠, 𝑠′), return 𝑋𝑜to 𝑐return, and mark verified-aborted
5:
return
6: end if
7: query gateway by the exact binding (𝑔𝑜, 𝜒𝑜, 𝜅𝑜, 𝛽𝑜, 𝜂𝑜)
8: if authenticated success receipt 𝑟+ is returned then
9:
SettleOutcome(𝑜, 𝑟+)
10: else if gateway atomically fences the old binding/epoch and returns 𝜋¬𝑒then
11:
SettleOutcome(𝑜, 𝜋¬𝑒)
12: else if administrator chooses permanent safety over utilization then
13:
move 𝑋𝑜∶Q(𝑜) →F(𝑜); preserve obligation
14: else
15:
retain indeterminate; schedule bounded-backoff reconciliation
16: end if
Let FreshAuthenticated𝑠(𝑐+) mean that no credit with the signed identity of 𝑐+ exists in 𝑠and
that its credit-authority authentication verifies. Then
ReissueTarget(𝑐, 𝜂, 𝜂+, 𝑐+, 𝑠, 𝑠′)
⟺FreshAuthenticated𝑠(𝑐+) ∧𝜂= 𝜂𝑐
∧𝜂+ = AuthoritativeEpoch𝑠(𝑔, 𝜒𝑐) ∧𝑔𝑐+ = 𝑔𝑐
∧𝜒𝑐+ = 𝜒𝑐∧𝑃𝑐+ = {𝑐}
∧Authority(𝑐+) = Authority(𝑐) ∧𝜂𝑐+ = 𝜂+ ∧𝜆𝑐+ ⊑𝜆𝑐
∧Current𝑠′(𝑐+, 𝜂+) ∧¬Current𝑠′(𝑐, 𝜂).
(16)
The reference SQLite profile fuses a final terminal decision with successor installation. To give
that concrete transaction one exact abstract image, define ValidTerminal𝑠(𝑜, 𝜔) to mean exactly
one of: (i) 𝜔= 𝑟+, 𝑜is quarantined with all 𝑋𝑜in Q(𝑜), Verify+(𝑟+, 𝑜), and the receipt’s 𝜄𝑟+ ∈Obs(𝑠);
(ii) 𝜔= 𝜋¬𝑒, 𝑜is quarantined with all 𝑋𝑜in Q(𝑜), Verify¬𝑒(𝜋¬𝑒, 𝑜), and the verified certificate binds
the installed higher fence for (𝑔𝑜, 𝜒𝑜) and proves that the exact binding was never accepted and can-
not execute; or (iii) 𝜔= 𝜋local, 𝑜is reserved with all 𝑋𝑜in R(𝑜), and LocalNoDispatchPre𝑠(𝜋local, 𝑜).
Let the terminal outcome determine two disjoint footprints:
𝜔
CommitFoot(𝑜, 𝜔)
ReturnFoot(𝑜, 𝜔)
𝑟+
𝐷𝑜
𝑋𝑜∖𝐷𝑜
𝜋¬𝑒or 𝜋local
∅
𝑋𝑜.
Define
TermStatus(𝜔) = {committed,
𝜔= 𝑟+,
verified-aborted,
𝜔∈{𝜋¬𝑒, 𝜋local}.


26
Zhu and Wang
The terminal record stores this tag, the evidence and acceptance-binding digests, and the exact
committed and return footprint commitments:
TermRecord(𝑜, 𝜔) = ⟨TermStatus(𝜔), 𝐻(𝜔), 𝐻(𝛽𝑜),
𝐻(CommitFoot(𝑜, 𝜔)), 𝐻(ReturnFoot(𝑜, 𝜔))⟩.
Define
RolloverReady𝑠(𝑐, 𝜂, 𝜂+, 𝑜, 𝜔)
⟺𝜂= 𝜂𝑐∧𝜂+ > 𝜂
∧𝜂+ = AuthoritativeEpoch𝑠(𝑔, 𝜒𝑐)
∧FenceInstalled𝑠(𝑔, 𝜒𝑐, 𝜂+) ∧𝜎𝑐= closing
∧ValidTerminal𝑠(𝑜, 𝜔) ∧𝑜∈Ops(𝑐, 𝜂)
∧Authority(𝑐) = SettlementAuthority(𝑜)
∧TermDecision𝑠[𝑜𝑖𝑑] = ⊥∧Decision𝑠[𝐾𝑐] = ⊥
∧SafeA𝑠(𝑐, 𝜂) = Avail𝑠(𝑐, 𝜂)
∧∀𝑥∈Transfers(𝑐, 𝜂) ∶𝛿[𝑥] ∈{accepted, cancelled}
∧∀𝑜′ ∈Ops(𝑐, 𝜂) ∖{𝑜} ∶
𝜎𝑜′ ∈{committed, verified-aborted, forfeited}.
(17)
Then the fused action is defined, not merely implemented by convention:
TerminalRollover(𝑜, 𝜔, 𝑐, 𝜂, 𝜂+, 𝑐+, 𝑠, 𝑠′) ⟺
RolloverReady𝑠(𝑐, 𝜂, 𝜂+, 𝑜, 𝜔) ∧ReissueTarget(𝑐, 𝜂, 𝜂+, 𝑐+, 𝑠, 𝑠′)
∧Decision𝑠′[𝐾𝑐] = (𝜂+, 𝑐+)
∧TermDecision𝑠′[𝑜𝑖𝑑] = TermRecord(𝑜, 𝜔)
∧𝜎′𝑜= TermStatus(𝜔) ∧𝜎′𝑐= closed
∧(𝜔= 𝜋local ⇒Verifylocal(𝜋local, 𝑜, 𝑠, 𝑠′))
∧{
SafeA𝑠(𝑐, 𝜂) ∶A(𝑐) →A(𝑐+),
CommitFoot(𝑜, 𝜔) ∶Q(𝑜) →C(𝑜),
ReturnFoot(𝑜, 𝜔) ∶R(𝑜) or Q(𝑜) →A(𝑐+),
∧Closed𝑠′(𝑐, 𝜂, 𝜂+),
∧Frame𝑜,𝑐,𝑐+(𝑠, 𝑠′).
(18)
Frame𝑜,𝑐,𝑐+(𝑠, 𝑠′) keeps every state component unchanged except the three displayed ownership
moves, 𝑜’s terminal record/status, 𝑐’s closure, creation/current installation of 𝑐+, and the two dis-
played write-once decisions. Every branch sets the named outbox’s outcome field exactly to the
value fixed by TermRecord and appends exactly its content-addressed audit node. The 𝜋local branch,
and no other branch, additionally replaces the outbox dispatch gate by its absorbing local-abort
marker. The three moved sets are pairwise disjoint: SafeA𝑠(𝑐, 𝜂) is available before the action,
whereas CommitFoot ⊎ReturnFoot = 𝑋𝑜is reserved or quarantined. The commit also persists
the canonical 𝐷𝑜/remainder commitments when 𝜔= 𝑟+, marks 𝑜terminal, closes 𝑐, and installs 𝑐+
as the active generation for the same slot. Exact replay stutters; a changed witness, partition, epoch,


Fault-Tolerant Budget Conservation in Agent Delegation
27
or successor is rejected. The authority conjunct in Equation (17), together with ReissueTarget, sup-
plies the settlement-authority clause of ReturnTarget for every returned atom without defining
either predicate circularly.
Reuse is a new ownership transition: under the state-transition predicate in Equation (16), it
atomically moves exactly Reusable𝑠(𝑐, 𝜂, 𝜂+) from its proved available records into a fresh same-
root, same-authority, non-widening lineage successor (𝑐+, 𝜂+). It never changes an old C or F
record and never reuses an accepted transfer. The gateway rejects a new old-epoch acceptance
after the fence while idempotently revealing an outcome that crossed before it. An epoch check
only at the budget store is insufficient if a stale worker holds direct receiver credentials.
6.9
Fan-In and Return
A task join has three safe choices:
(1) retain separate branch credits and select one for each new effect;
(2) atomically join disjoint, operation-free footprints under one authoritative store; or
(3) transfer each branch’s remainder through sealed handoffs to a join store, then join after ac-
knowledgment.
It may not add reported numeric balances from branches. Each return uses a stable transfer ID
and consumes the child footprint. Duplicate completion or return messages stutter. A canceled
branch with an indeterminate operation can return only its unaffected available footprint; the
obligation remains charged to the root.
6.10
Protocol Adapters
An adapter maps concrete events to abstract transitions:
𝛼∶ConcreteEvent →{Issue, Split, Delegate, AcceptTransfer, CancelTransfer,
Reserve, Dispatch, GatewayAccept, EffectOccurs,
Settle, Return, Retire, Fence, Reissue, TerminalRollover, Join, stutter}.
For MCP, the operation binding travels with the tool call or trusted proxy context. For A2A, a
task delegation carries the child credit certificate and the completion record carries the stable
operation/transfer IDs. For HTTP, the gateway maps 𝜅to an idempotency or conditional-write
primitive. Protocol authentication can use AIP/AAT or conventional workload identity; the budget
protocol does not define a new bearer-token format.
An adapter is conforming only if it preserves root, logical slot, credit generation, lineage and
footprint commitments, vector and maximum charge, selector schema version, label digests, epoch,
canonical operation key, complete acceptance digest 𝛽𝑜, normalized effect digest, receiver, joint
witness, terminal- evidence binding, and terminal committed/remainder footprint commitments.
Unknown fields that affect effect semantics fail closed. A textual Agent message never substitutes
for a trusted adapter event.
6.11
Stable Decisions and Reason Codes
Every rejection or uncertainty is explicit:
7
Safety Results: Conservation and Recovery
This section proves safety for the abstract machine in Section 5 and states the additional obli-
gations needed to lift the results to a concrete implementation. The proofs are prefix properties:
they hold after every transition, including prefixes that end at a crash, partition, lost response, or
permanently indeterminate effect. They do not assume eventual message delivery.


28
Zhu and Wang
Reason
Meaning
Required response
INSUFFICIENT_
LOCAL_ESCROW
Branch lacks exclusive rights
Coordinate transfer or refuse; never
read a stale global total
LINEAGE_ALIAS
Join inputs overlap
Reject and audit
STALE_CREDIT_EPOCH
Message targets an old generation
Return prior outcome or reject; do
not execute
OPERATION_
BINDING_MISMATCH
Replay changed
effect/vector/receiver
Reject as conflicting replay
TERMINAL_EVIDENCE_
BINDING_MISMATCH
Success receipt or no-effect
certificate does not prove this
operation
Retain reservation and investigate
EFFECT_INDETERMINATE
Dispatch may have crossed
boundary
Keep quarantined; query or forfeit
NO_SAFE_RECLAIM_PROOF
No authoritative
non-acceptance/no-effect proof
under the installed fence
Retain Q or F; settle, or fence and
query for proof
ADAPTER_
REFINEMENT_FAILURE
Concrete event lacks abstract
binding
Fail closed at boundary
Table 3. Stable decisions make conservative failure observable. None of the uncertain cases is silently con-
verted into available budget.
7.1
Proof Setup
Write 𝑠
𝑎−→𝑠′ when abstract action 𝑎takes state 𝑠to 𝑠′, and let Reach be the least set containing
the initial state and closed under the transition relation. For a root 𝑔, resource dimension 𝑘, and
atom 𝑢∈𝑈𝑔, define
𝜒𝑔(𝑢)𝑘= {1,
𝑢= (𝑔, 𝑘, 𝑗) for some 𝑗,
0,
otherwise.
For a location class 𝑍∈{A, T, R, Q, C, F}, write 𝒵𝑠for its raw tagged ownership relation and define
Z𝑔(𝑠) =
∑
𝑢∈supp(𝒵𝑠)
𝜒𝑔(𝑢).
This definition does not presume that the six relations are disjoint or total. Distinct competing tags
within one relation or a cross-relation overlap remain visible in the candidate multiset Own𝑠(𝑢)
from Section 5; byte-identical storage replicas abstract to one logical relation member.
The transition relation treats each stable operation identifier as a single-assignment decision key.
Repeating an already accepted request with identical immutable fields is a stutter step; repeating
it with different fields is rejected and is also a stutter at the abstract level. A crash before an atomic
durable commit is a stutter. A crash after that commit observes the committed successor state.
These conventions make crash cuts explicit without assuming that a process executes a multi-
record update exactly once.
Definition 8 (Atom-pReseRving tRansition). A transition 𝑠
𝑎−→𝑠′ is atom preserving for root
𝑔if there is a set 𝑌⊆𝑈𝑔such that
∀𝑢∉𝑌∶Own𝑠′(𝑢) = Own𝑠(𝑢),


Fault-Tolerant Budget Conservation in Agent Delegation
29
and, for each 𝑢∈𝑌, the action guard requires Own𝑠(𝑢) = {ℓsrc} and the authoritative commit atomi-
cally removes that source pair and inserts exactly one permitted destination pair. It neither duplicates
nor deletes an input atom.
Every non-issuance action in the abstract machine is atom preserving. Split, Join, ordinary
successor-generation issuance, and TerminalRollover change the credit tag inside 𝒜; Delegate, ac-
ceptance, and cancellation move atoms A →T →A; Reserve, Dispatch, Settle, Return, and Retire
move atoms among the six bucket classes. TerminalRollover additionally applies one terminal par-
tition while installing the successor, but its moved footprints are disjoint. Fence changes an epoch
but not an ownership relation. Later evidence for a forfeited operation annotates its outcome while
F(𝑜) remains absorbing.
7.2
Unique Ownership and Exact Conservation
Lemma 1 (OwneRship-paRtition pReseRvation). Under Assumptions 1–3, every reachable state
𝑠∈Reach has exactly one raw ownership tag for each 𝑢∈𝑈𝑔:
∀𝑔∀𝑢∈𝑈𝑔,
|Own𝑠(𝑢)| = 1.
PRoof. We induct on the length of the execution prefix. At issuance, authenticated root unique-
ness gives one 𝑈𝑔, and Issue assigns every atom in it to the root credit. Thus the property holds
initially.
Assume it holds in 𝑠. Consider 𝑠
𝑎−→𝑠′. A rejected, duplicate, or pre-commit-crash action stutters,
so the induction hypothesis applies directly. For a committed action, Assumption 2 excludes a
visible state containing only a proper subset of its local moves, while the protocol guard checks
that every input has a singleton source tag. Stable local decision keys and the transfer decision
register in Assumption 3 prevent replay or competing terminal decisions from applying a second
move. Each transition is atom preserving:
• Split removes pairwise-disjoint 𝑋𝑖from one parent before assigning each 𝑋𝑖to one child. No
atom is in two 𝑋𝑖.
• A delegation seal removes each source pair and inserts one T(𝑥) pair. Acceptance and cancel-
lation compete on the monotone register in Equation (5). An accepted decision completes the
uniquely named destination import; a cancelled decision restores the source. Neither terminal
value enables the other, and a pending transfer remains solely in T.
• Reserve and Dispatch respectively relabel A(𝑐) as R(𝑜) and R(𝑜) as Q(𝑜).
• Successful Settle partitions 𝑋𝑜into the disjoint, version-determined footprints 𝐷𝑜
=
Take𝜈sel(𝑋𝑜, d𝑟+) and 𝑋𝑜∖𝐷𝑜, assigning the former to C(𝑜) and the latter, when nonempty, to
the one decision-bound available credit satisfying Equation (7). Verified abort and retirement
each select exactly one successor for every input atom; outcome annotation after retirement
changes no ownership relation.
• TerminalRollover partitions the final operation into the disjoint CommitFoot(𝑜, 𝜔) and
ReturnFoot(𝑜, 𝜔). These are disjoint from SafeA𝑠(𝑐, 𝜂), whose atoms are available before the
action. Equation (18) sends every atom in the three sets to exactly one of C(𝑜) or A(𝑐+) in the
same authoritative commit.
• An admissible Join consumes all pairwise-disjoint input footprints in one authoritative action,
then assigns their union to one output credit.
• Fence, gateway acceptance, effect occurrence, and evidence annotation do not change an own-
ership relation. Successor-generation issuance moves only the singleton available atoms in
Reusable𝑠(𝑐, 𝜂, 𝜂+) to one fresh available tag satisfying Equation (16).


30
Zhu and Wang
Hence each changed atom loses exactly one source tag and gains exactly one destination tag in
the same abstract commit, while all other candidate multisets are unchanged. The property there-
fore holds in 𝑠′. Only now is loc𝑠(𝑢) well-defined as the unique element of Own𝑠(𝑢); uniqueness
was not supplied by a function type.
□
TheoRem 1 (Exact peR-Root vectoR conseRvation). Under Assumptions 1–3, every reachable
state and every root grant satisfy, componentwise,
A𝑔(𝑠) + T𝑔(𝑠) + R𝑔(𝑠) + Q𝑔(𝑠) + C𝑔(𝑠) + F𝑔(𝑠) = B𝑔.
All six vectors remain in ℕ|𝒦|.
PRoof. Fix 𝑔and 𝑘. By Lemma 1, every atom (𝑔, 𝑘, 𝑗) ∈𝑈𝑔contributes exactly one to exactly one
of the six bucket coordinates. There are 𝐵𝑔,𝑘such atoms by Definition 1. Summing their indicators
gives
𝐴𝑔,𝑘+ 𝑇𝑔,𝑘+ 𝑅𝑔,𝑘+ 𝑄𝑔,𝑘+ 𝐶𝑔,𝑘+ 𝐹𝑔,𝑘= 𝐵𝑔,𝑘.
The argument holds independently for every 𝑘. Each coordinate is a cardinality and is therefore
a non-negative integer. Notice that the proof does not require a terminal response: an unresolved
dispatch contributes to Q𝑔, and permanently stranded authority contributes to F𝑔.
□
CoRollaRy 1 (No minting by RetRy, RecoveRy, oR join). Under Assumptions 1–3, no finite
sequence of duplicate messages, process restarts, reconciliations, or lineage-disjoint joins can increase
the sum of spendable and obligated capacity for a root beyond B𝑔.
PRoof. Retries and recovery actions are either stutters or atom-preserving moves. Joins union
disjoint footprints after consuming their inputs. Theorem 1 therefore applies to every resulting
prefix.
□
7.3
Lineage and Descendant Non-Amplification
For the next results, define the responsible lineage of an atom to be the credit lineage that currently
holds it or the lineage embedded in its transfer or operation binding. Terminal locations retain that
binding; a committed or forfeited atom does not lose provenance merely because it is no longer
spendable.
Lemma 2 (Lineage pRovenance). Under Assumptions 1–3, for every reachable state, the respon-
sible lineage of each 𝑢∈𝑈𝑔contains a path from the unique root credit to its current credit, transfer,
or operation. Along that path the atom is moved, never copied, and every descendant label applicable
to 𝑢restricts its ancestor labels.
PRoof. The root path is trivial after Issue. Induct on transitions. Split adds one parent edge for
each moved atom; pairwise disjointness selects one child. Delegate records the source generation
in its sealed certificate, and destination acceptance creates one child from that certificate. Reserve
copies the credit identifier, epoch, and label binding into the operation while moving the atom
out of availability. Dispatch, Retire, and reconciliation preserve that operation binding. Settle and
Return can place a returned atom only in a same-root successor that is current at the atomic commit
and satisfies Equation (7); cross-store or ancestor return must use a later sealed transfer. Ordinary
Reissue creates only the authenticated same-root, same-authority successor in Equation (16), with
𝜆𝑐+ ⊑𝜆𝑐. TerminalRollover records that same authenticated reissue edge atomically with the final
terminal decision: committed atoms end at 𝑜, while every returned atom and every atom in the
predecessor’s disjoint SafeA footprint has the unique predecessor 𝑐and ends at 𝑐+. An admissible
Join requires all inputs and its output to have the same root and records all input generations


Fault-Tolerant Budget Conservation in Agent Delegation
31
but, because their footprints are disjoint, each individual atom has exactly one input predecessor.
Assumption 1 prevents a forged predecessor; Lemma 1 and the singleton source guard prevent a
second owner. Equations (3) and (7) supply label restriction at every lineage-creating or return
step. Transitivity of ⊑gives restriction against all applicable ancestors.
□
Fix a finite execution prefix 𝜌ending in state 𝑠and a single-root credit sub-DAG 𝑊. Call 𝑊
credit-cut closed along 𝜌when every authoritative ownership event that moves responsibility for an
atom from a lineage outside 𝑊to one inside 𝑊appends the exact moved footprint to a monotone
authenticated ingress history. Such events include cross-cut split outputs, accepted sealed transfers,
returned remainders and verified aborts, successor reissues, and every outside input consumed by
a join. A task-dependency edge or balance report alone is not an ingress. Let In𝜌(𝑊) be the set
union of those event footprints, deduplicated by atom identity if the same right later re-enters,
and let Held𝑠(𝑊) be the atoms whose current available, reserved, indeterminate, committed, or
forfeited responsibility lies in 𝑊; atoms sealed for transfer out of 𝑊are excluded.
TheoRem 2 (Descendant non-amplification). Under Assumptions 1–3, for every finite execu-
tion prefix 𝜌ending in reachable state 𝑠and every sub-DAG 𝑊that is credit-cut closed along 𝜌,
Held𝑠(𝑊) ⊆In𝜌(𝑊),
vec(Held𝑠(𝑊)) ⪯vec(In𝜌(𝑊)).
If 𝑊contains the root credit, take In𝜌(𝑊) = 𝑈𝑔.
PRoof. Induct on the transitions of 𝜌, reasoning per atom. Initially a non-root 𝑊holds no atom,
whereas a root-containing 𝑊holds a subset of 𝑈𝑔. A transition whose source and destination
responsible lineages are both inside 𝑊merely relabels the atom. A transition to a lineage outside
𝑊, including an egress seal, removes it from Held(𝑊). A transition from outside to inside can
add only an atom in its exact authenticated footprint; credit-cut closure appends that footprint
to the history defining In𝜌(𝑊) in the same logical move. This case covers cross-cut split, transfer,
return, ordinary reissue, TerminalRollover, and join rather than assuming any of them is internal.
Transitions on the outside and stable decision replays do not change either side; the latter stutter
because their decision keys are unique. Lemma 1 excludes a second simultaneous owner in every
case. Hence the set inclusion is preserved. Applying vec, which is monotone under set inclusion,
gives the componentwise inequality.
□
The theorem is deliberately about the credit-lineage DAG, not the task DAG. Adding a depen-
dency edge, reference, model message, or shared specialist does not change In𝜌(𝑊) and therefore
grants no capacity.
7.4
Stable Settlement and Continuous Effect Coverage
Lemma 3 (TeRminal-decision stability). Under Assumptions 2, 3, and 7, for any operation 𝑜, at
most one terminal settlement decision can change ownership of 𝑋𝑜. After that decision, an identical
evidence item is a stutter and conflicting terminal evidence is rejected.
PRoof. The operation row and its terminal-decision key are updated in the same local trans-
action as the ownership move. By Assumption 2, two concurrent settlement attempts are seri-
alized: the first committed attempt either records a terminal decision or leaves the old state un-
changed. Every later attempt observes that decision. An identical witness returns the recorded
result; any byte-distinct witness conflicts with the stored TermRecord digest and is rejected before
an ownership move. Before a first decision can be created, an external variant must pass its type-
matched Verifyterm verifier and a local variant must pass Verifylocal(𝜋local, 𝑜, 𝑠, 𝑠′); the closed sum
admits no unverified fourth case. TerminalRollover uses this same operation terminal-decision key


32
Zhu and Wang
while atomically adding the independent normalized reissue decision; it is not a second settlement
namespace. A crash before the first commit leaves no ownership move; a crash after it leaves the
terminal key and ownership move together. Consequently there is no reachable prefix in which
two terminal settlement transitions both move 𝑋𝑜.
□
TheoRem 3 (At-most-once authoRitative settlement). Under Assumptions 1, 2, 3, 5, and 7,
each canonical operation key 𝜅𝑜has at most one non-conflicting authoritative outcome, and its charged
footprint is applied to C𝑔at most once.
PRoof. Assumption 5 maps all gateway retries under 𝜅𝑜to one logical receiver outcome. As-
sumption 7 binds either admissible evidence variant to 𝑜𝑖𝑑, 𝜅𝑜, the complete acceptance digest 𝛽𝑜,
root, logical slot, lineage, epoch, effect digest, and receiver. A success receipt additionally binds
the instance and charge; a no-effect certificate instead binds the higher installed fence for the same
logical slot and is mutually exclusive with success. Lemma 3 allows at most one variant to move
ownership. Thus the canonical footprint 𝐷𝑜= Take𝜈sel(𝑋𝑜, d𝑟+) enters C(𝑜) at most once. Network
messages and responses may be delivered more than once; the theorem concerns authoritative
settlement, not exactly-once transport.
□
Lemma 4 (Ambiguity Remains chaRged). Suppose Dispatch(𝑜) has committed. Every atom
of 𝑋𝑜remains in Q(𝑜) until Settle, Return, Retire, or the corresponding terminal branch of
TerminalRollover. Before authenticated successful or verified-no-effect terminal evidence, it is either
retained in Q(𝑜) or conservatively moved to absorbing F(𝑜). A timeout, process death, lease expiry,
partition, missing response, or epoch increment alone cannot move any atom of 𝑋𝑜to A.
PRoof. After the durable dispatch cut, the abstract location is Q(𝑜). Inspecting the transition
relation, only Settle, Return, Retire, and TerminalRollover can remove an atom from that location.
Authenticated successful settlement partitions it into C and an authenticated remainder in A; a
fenced verified-no-effect decision returns it to A; retirement moves it to F. The corresponding
TerminalRollover branches apply exactly the same terminal partitions while atomically installing
a successor. Nonterminal reconciliation observations stutter. Timeout, failure suspicion, and lease
expiry are not ownership transitions. Fence changes only the accepted epoch. Therefore ambiguity
cannot create available capacity.
□
TheoRem 4 (Continuous injective coveRage of mediated effect instances). Under As-
sumptions 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, and 9, every reachable state satisfies
∀𝜄∈Obs(𝑠),
∃! 𝑜∈𝒪∶Covered(𝜄, 𝑜, 𝑠),
and no one-effect-profile operation covers two distinct instances.
PRoof. Induct on abstract transitions, treating Obs as a monotone state variable. Initially it
is empty. Only EffectOccurs(𝑜, 𝜄) can append an instance. Its guard requires a prior gateway ac-
ceptance of the immutable digest 𝛽𝑜in Equation (6), together with 𝜅𝑜. On first acceptance, the
action guard requires a matching durable dispatchable marker and the full footprint in Q(𝑜), or
conservatively in F(𝑜) after retirement. An exact replay after a later terminal move reads the ex-
isting accepted register and stutters; it cannot create a new acceptance. The accepted witness
also establishes RequiredCap(𝑒, 𝜒) ⪯u𝑜, and the (𝑔, 𝜒𝑐) committed inside 𝛽𝑜selects the corre-
sponding current-generation register and gateway fence. Thus the three non-recursive clauses of
Covered(𝜄, 𝑜, 𝑠) hold when 𝜄is appended.
Assumption 5 allocates a fresh 𝑖𝑖𝑑and acceptance sequence to at most one instance for the
receiver-scoped key. The canonical domain-separated derivation of 𝜅, stable operation decision,
and immutable binding prevent a different operation from acquiring that key within the stated


Fault-Tolerant Budget Conservation in Agent Delegation
33
collision-resistance assumption; the one-effect guard prevents the same operation from appending
a second instance. This proves both directions of injectivity. Two separate operations may still
request byte-identical descriptors; their keys and 𝑖𝑖𝑑values make them distinct budgeted instances.
Subsequent ownership actions preserve coverage. Before terminal evidence, Lemma 4 retains
all of 𝑋𝑜in Q, or Retire moves it wholly to absorbing F. A complete committed receipt identifies
the unique 𝜄, moves the version-determined footprint
𝐷𝑜= Take𝜈sel(𝑋𝑜, ActualCharge(𝜄))
to C, and returns only the complement to a target satisfying Equation (7). A verified-no-effect re-
turn is disabled after gateway acceptance linearizes by terminal-evidence non-equivocation and
the non-acceptance premise of Assumption 7. If TerminalRollover is applied to an operation cov-
ering 𝜄, its ValidTerminal evidence can therefore only be that same complete success receipt: the
no-effect branch contradicts prior acceptance and the local-abort branch contradicts durable dis-
patch. Equation (18) moves the same 𝐷𝑜to C, moves only its complement to the successor, and
moves the predecessor’s disjoint SafeA footprint without changing 𝑜’s coverage. Evidence arriving
after retirement annotates the record without moving F; the operation remains in Risk𝑔at its max-
imum rather than entering Settled𝑔. All other transitions preserve 𝛽𝑜and Obs. Hence coverage
and injectivity hold for every prefix.
□
TheoRem 5 (Root-bounded mediated exteRnal exposuRe). Under the assumptions of Theo-
rem 4, every reachable state satisfies Equation (11):
∑
𝜄∈Settled𝑔(𝑠)
ActualCharge(𝜄) +
∑
𝑜∈Risk𝑔(𝑠)
u𝑜⪯C𝑔(𝑠) + Q𝑔(𝑠) + F𝑔(𝑠) ⪯B𝑔.
PRoof. For every settled instance, success-receipt completeness gives the distinct charged foot-
print 𝐷𝑜= Take𝜈sel(𝑋𝑜, ActualCharge(𝜄)) in 𝒞𝑠. For every risk operation, irrespective of a later
evidence annotation, its entire maximum footprint 𝑋𝑜is present in 𝒬𝑠or ℱ𝑠, so u𝑜= vec(𝑋𝑜). By
definition an F-resident late success is counted only in this second, conservative term. The cover-
age injectivity theorem and ownership partition make all of these charged and at-risk footprints
pairwise disjoint; no atom contributes to both sums. Their vector sum is therefore bounded by the
raw supports of 𝒞𝑠, 𝒬𝑠, ℱ𝑠. Exact conservation and non-negativity then give C𝑔+ Q𝑔+ F𝑔⪯B𝑔.
The first sum reports actual settled charge; the second deliberately charges uncertainty and forfei-
ture at their enforced maxima.
□
7.5
Epoch Fencing, Late Completion, and Safe Reclaim
Lemma 5 (No stale ResuRRection). Under Assumptions 1, 2, and 5, if the authoritative epoch for
credit 𝑐advances from 𝜂to 𝜂′ > 𝜂, no later transition can make 𝜂current again, and no new protected
effect under (𝑐, 𝜂) is accepted after the corresponding gateway fence is installed.
PRoof. Epoch updates are strictly increasing by the Fence precondition, so the credit authority
cannot restore 𝜂. Assumption 5 requires the protected gateway to compare an incoming generation
against the installed fence. It either rejects a previously unseen stale request or returns the outcome
already recorded for its stable key. Neither behavior creates a new old-epoch effect. Reordered or
replayed messages do not alter the monotone fence.
□
TheoRem 6 (Late-completion safety). Assume 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, and 9. Let a mediated operation 𝑜
be dispatched under epoch 𝜂, let its caller time out, and let a controller later install an authoritative
successor epoch 𝜂+ > 𝜂. If GatewayAccept(𝑜) linearized before the fence, all of 𝑋𝑜remains charged in
Q(𝑜) or F(𝑜) until complete terminal evidence. A pre-retirement success moves its exact actual-charge


34
Zhu and Wang
footprint 𝐷𝑜to C(𝑜); only its authenticated complement may return to A, after the same terminal
decision excludes any further instance or charge under the old binding. A post-retirement result leaves
all of 𝑋𝑜in absorbing F(𝑜). If no acceptance linearized before the fence, the gateway cannot newly ac-
cept the old epoch afterward. Consequently neither ordinary generation closure and successor issuance
under Equations (14)–(16) nor fused terminal rollover under Equations (17)–(18) can make one atom
simultaneously fund a late old-epoch effect and a new-generation effect.
PRoof. There are two cases.
Acceptance linearized before the fence. Its reservation was already in Q(𝑜) by the durable-
before-exposure order. Timeout and epoch advance do not refund it by Lemma 4. A complete
pre-retirement success moves 𝐷𝑜
=
Take𝜈sel(𝑋𝑜, d𝑟+) permanently to C(𝑜) and may return
𝑋𝑜∖𝐷𝑜only in the same write-once terminal decision. Receipt completeness and the one-effect
gateway rule then prohibit a later instance or additional charge under (𝜅𝑜, 𝛽𝑜), so no returned
complement atom funds the old effect. If retirement commits first, F remains absorbing and
late evidence only annotates it; otherwise the unresolved footprint stays in Q(𝑜). Assumption 7
disables a verified-no-effect return after acceptance has linearized, and a fence does not cancel
that acceptance.
No acceptance linearized before the fence. Lemma 5 disables a new old-epoch acceptance, so no
protected effect can arise from that binding. If a retry instead observes a previously recorded ac-
ceptance or result, the premise of this case is false and the execution belongs to the first case.
Equation (14) closes the old generation only after the fence is installed, every transfer decision
is terminal, and every old operation is committed, verified-aborted, or forfeited. Equation (15) then
selects only uniquely available, retained-provenance atoms. Committed and forfeited atoms, and
atoms carried by accepted transfers, are excluded. For the dispatched operation in this theorem,
a verified-aborted atom is selectable only with an authoritative no-effect certificate protected by
the same fence; an authenticated success remainder is selectable only after its exact charged com-
plement and complete single-instance terminal result are fixed. An ordinary successor-generation
action moves, rather than copies, that exact set under the normalized write-once reissue decision.
When the last terminal decision and successor installation are fused, Equations (17)– (18) estab-
lish the same facts atomically: the canonical committed and return footprints partition 𝑋𝑜, both
are disjoint from the predecessor’s SafeA footprint, and exactly the return and SafeA atoms move
to the normalized same-slot successor. Therefore a reclaimed atom can neither be in 𝐷𝑜nor later
acquire charge under the old binding, and no atom can fund effects in both generations.
□
CoRollaRy 2 (FailuRe suspicion is neveR a Refund pRoof). Replacing the terminal-evidence
premises in Equations (14)–(15) or (17)–(18) with a timeout, worker lease expiry, or controller failure
detector invalidates Theorem 6.
PRoof. In an asynchronous system, an observer cannot distinguish an unexecuted request from
an executed request whose response is delayed. Refund in the latter execution makes the same
atoms available while the effect exists. The gateway fence and authoritative outcome are therefore
proof obligations, not implementation conveniences.
□
7.6
Partition Confinement and the Coordination Boundary
TheoRem 7 (PaRtition confinement). Under Assumptions 1–3, consider a network partition
that separates credit authorities into components 𝑃1, … , 𝑃𝑚at state 𝑠𝑐. For each fixed root 𝑔, define
the component-held footprint
Held𝑔
𝑠(𝑃𝑖) = {𝑢∈𝑈𝑔∣𝑢’s current A/R/Q/C/F responsible authority is in 𝑃𝑖}.


Fault-Tolerant Budget Conservation in Agent Delegation
35
Pending T atoms are excluded from this set and assigned separately to their unique source component
below. Define
𝐸𝑔
𝑖= Held𝑔
𝑠𝑐(𝑃𝑖) ∪
⋃
𝑥∶𝛿𝑠𝑐[𝑥]=pending
src(𝑥)∈𝑃𝑖, 𝑋𝑥⊆𝑈𝑔
𝑋𝑥,
with set union by atom identity. An already accepted transfer is owned by its destination and a can-
celled transfer by its source; only a pending transfer is charged to its source component for this cut
accounting. If no cross-cut transfer is accepted during the partition, then for every prefix during that
partition,
Held𝑔
𝑠(𝑃𝑖) ⊆𝐸𝑔
𝑖
and
∑
𝑖
vec(Held𝑔
𝑠(𝑃𝑖)) ⪯B𝑔.
In particular, a component can progress locally from its own available escrow but cannot spend a right
assigned to another component.
PRoof. The 𝐸𝑔
𝑖are pairwise disjoint by ownership partition and the unique pending-transfer
source. Induct over partition-time transitions. Local split, reserve, dispatch, settlement, retirement,
return, ordinary reissue, TerminalRollover, or same-root join only relabels root-𝑔atoms already in
𝐸𝑔
𝑖. A pending local transfer can accept within the same component; a pending cross-cut transfer
either stays in T or cancels back to its source 𝐸𝑔
𝑖, because cross-cut acceptance is excluded by
premise. Stable replays stutter, and a message reporting a remote balance is not a credit transition.
Thus Held𝑔
𝑠(𝑃𝑖) ⊆𝐸𝑔
𝑖throughout. Disjointness and ⋃𝑖𝐸𝑔
𝑖⊆𝑈𝑔yield the aggregate inequality. A
component that exhausts its local A must wait, reconcile, or refuse; safety does not imply continued
availability.
□
PRoposition 1 (Unallocated-unit impossibility). In an asynchronous system with a possible
partition, no protocol can simultaneously guarantee both:
(1) local availability: either of two isolated branches must approve a request to spend the same cur-
rently unallocated unit using only its local state; and
(2) global conservation: across all executions, at most one protected effect may consume that unit.
This holds even with crash-free branches and reliable local storage.
PRoof. Let branches 𝑝and 𝑞have identical knowledge that one shared unit remains, then parti-
tion them before either receives another message. Consider execution 𝐸𝑝, in which only 𝑝receives
a spend request. Local availability requires 𝑝to approve. Symmetrically, in execution 𝐸𝑞, in which
only 𝑞receives a request, 𝑞must approve.
Now construct 𝐸𝑝𝑞, in which both receive their requests during the same partition. Up to its deci-
sion, 𝑝’s local history in 𝐸𝑝𝑞is indistinguishable from its history in 𝐸𝑝, so it approves. Likewise 𝑞’s
history is indistinguishable from 𝐸𝑞, so it approves. Two effects consume one unit, contradicting
global conservation. Randomization cannot provide a universal safety guarantee: any coin out-
comes that permit the respective one-sided approvals form an execution in which both approve.
Exclusive preallocation avoids the contradiction by falsifying the first premise: at most one
partition has the right to approve that unit. It provides availability for preallocated escrow, not for
a shared unallocated remainder.
□
7.7
Concrete Refinement Obligations
Let Σ be the concrete state of branch databases, outboxes, gateway records, terminal-evidence
stores, and epoch authorities. Let Rep(Σ, 𝑠) be a representation relation requiring:


36
Zhu and Wang
(1) each durable concrete credit, transfer, and operation maps to the corresponding abstract object
with equal root, logical slot, lineage, label, epoch, vector, and immutable identifiers;
(2) each sealed transfer has exactly one logical owner location; its monotone accept/cancel deci-
sion and crash finalization map to the same abstract transfer decision rather than a second
import or restoration;
(3) each committed database transaction maps to one abstract transition, including a fused
terminal-decision-plus-successor transaction mapping to TerminalRollover, and each uncom-
mitted or duplicate event maps to stutter;
(4) each concrete operation phase and write-once terminal-decision key agree with its abstract
R/Q/C/F ownership; its selector schema and exact committed/remainder footprint commit-
ments agree with the abstract deterministic partition and disable every conflicting terminal
move;
(5) gateway observations and terminal evidence map to the normalized effect and operation named
by their acceptance digest 𝛽𝑜, and concrete acceptance/fence records preserve the bound logical
slot and their authoritative linearization order;
(6) every concrete remainder or no-effect return maps to a same-root, current-at-commit, same-
authority, label-non-widening target satisfying Equation (7);
(7) every ordinary successor-generation issuance carries a concrete Closed proof and moves ex-
actly the concrete image of Reusable, excluding committed, forfeited, accepted, and unresolved
rights, into the sole target selected by its write-once reissue decision and satisfying Equa-
tion (16); the decision, current-generation metadata, and ownership move commit atomically;
(8) every fused final terminal decision and successor installation maps to TerminalRollover: it sat-
isfies Equations (17)–(18), persists the canonical terminal partition and normalized reissue de-
cision, and moves only the disjoint terminal-return and SafeA footprints to the same-slot suc-
cessor; and
(9) compressed footprints map injectively to logical rights, preserve disjointness, and have con-
crete sums equal to the abstract vec of their atom sets.
For paired finite prefixeŝ 𝜌= (Σ0, … , Σ𝑛) and 𝜌= (𝑠0, … , 𝑠𝑛), define Rep∗(̂𝜌, 𝜌) to require: (i)
Rep(Σ𝑖, 𝑠𝑖) for every 𝑖; (ii) every concrete authenticated cross-cut ingress event maps one-for-one
to the corresponding abstract event with the same exact footprint and atom-identity deduplication,
while task edges and balance reports map to no ingress; and (iii), for any partition-confinement
claim, the paired prefixes preserve the cut state and interval, authority-to-component assignment,
pending-transfer source component, and the predicate that no cross-cut acceptance commits dur-
ing the interval. Conditions (ii)–(iii) are the prefix-faithfulness obligation on 𝛼.
TheoRem 8 (Conditional tRace-lifting cRiteRion). Under Assumptions 2 and 8, a con-
crete runtime inherits the abstract safety results if it discharges the initial-state, stepwise, and
prefix-faithfulness obligations:
Rep(Σ0, 𝑠0)
and, for every concrete step Σ →Σ′ and every abstract state 𝑠,
Rep(Σ, 𝑠) ⟹∃𝑠′. ([𝑠′ = 𝑠∧𝛼(Σ, Σ′) = stutter] ∨[𝑠
𝛼(Σ,Σ′)
−−−−−−→𝑠′]) ∧Rep(Σ′, 𝑠′).
(19)
The disjunction denotes either one enabled abstract action with the same immutable binding or a
stutter step. If these obligations hold, then for every finite concrete execution
Σ0 →Σ1 →⋯→Σ𝑛


Fault-Tolerant Budget Conservation in Agent Delegation
37
there exists an abstract execution
𝑠0
𝛼1
−−→𝑠1
𝛼2
−−→⋯
𝛼𝑛
−−→𝑠𝑛
such that Rep∗((Σ0, … , Σ𝑛), (𝑠0, … , 𝑠𝑛)). Here 𝑠
stutter
−−−−−→𝑠denotes the explicit abstract self-loop used
for the first disjunct.
PRoof. Induct on 𝑖. The initial obligation supplies the base case. Applying Equation (19) to each
concrete successor supplies either a matching enabled abstract action or a stutter and preserves
Rep. Concatenating those witnesses yields the abstract execution and pointwise clause (i) of Rep∗;
prefix faithfulness supplies clauses (ii)–(iii).
□
The theorem states the exact criterion a concrete runtime must satisfy. A production implemen-
tation establishes Equation (19) handler by handler, including transfer accept/cancel, 𝑊2/𝑊3/𝑊4
crash cuts, gateway acceptance versus fencing, effect occurrence, ordinary successor-generation
issuance, and TerminalRollover. The artifact exercises bounded and concrete traces against these
obligations; finite trace agreement does not replace a universal implementation refinement proof.
The SQLite research profile implements and tests the online first-acceptance guard through a
branch-signed 𝑊3 permit, including missing, forged, stale, crash-recovered, and proof-excluded
cases. This supports the evaluated profile’s guard while leaving the universal adapter obligation
and conditional end-to-end theorem subject to a complete handler-level refinement argument.
TheoRem 9 (Conditional end-to-end dual conseRvation). If Assumptions 1–9 hold and the
concrete runtime satisfies the trace-lifting obligations of Theorem 8, then every finite concrete execution
prefix̂ 𝜌has a lifted abstract prefix 𝜌for which the following properties hold and reflect back tô 𝜌under
the stated theorem-specific premises:
(1) exact per-root vector conservation as in Equation (8);
(2) for every sub-DAG 𝑊that is credit-cut closed along the lifted prefix 𝜌, descendant non-
amplification as in Equation (12);
(3) at-most-once authoritative settlement per canonical operation;
(4) unique continuous coverage for every gateway-observed protected effect as in Equation (9);
(5) settled actual charge plus conservative outstanding exposure bounded by the issued vector as in
Equation (11);
(6) for every dispatched operation closed and reissued either ordinarily under Equations (14)–(15) or
atomically under Equations (17)–(18), no old-epoch effect funded by capacity safely reclaimed into
a new generation; and
(7) during every partition interval with no accepted cross-cut transfer, partition-local spending
bounded by the exclusive escrow assigned at the cut.
PRoof. Theorem 8 maps the concrete prefix to a reachable abstract prefix. Apply Theorems 1, 2,
3, 4, 5, 6, and 7 to that abstract prefix whenever their explicit sub-DAG, dispatched-operation, and
partition-interval premises hold. The representation relation preserves the identifiers, selector ver-
sion, footprint vectors and terminal partition commitments, epochs, effects, and terminal-evidence
bindings mentioned by those properties, so each property transfers back to the concrete state.
□
7.8
Assumption–Conclusion Boundary
Table 4 records the proof surface. “Required” means that the result as stated uses the assumption;
it does not mean that every deployment must implement that assumption in the same way.


38
Zhu and Wang
Result
Required assumptions /
premises
Failure if omitted
Not concluded
Ownership partition
and exact
conservation
Authenticated unique
roots/credits (Assumption 1);
atomic durable moves (2);
singleton-source guards and stable
decision keys (3)
Forged issuance, torn moves, or
copied inputs can duplicate or lose
atoms
Fair allocation, low stranding, or
timely completion
Semantic and
descendant
non-amplification
Root/lineage authenticity;
exclusive transfer; label
attenuation and credit-cut
accounting
A numeric balance may remain
bounded while purpose, audience,
or ancestry widens
Correctness of the policy classifier
or optimal task decomposition
At-most-once
settlement
Atomic terminal-decision key;
immutable operation binding;
sound tagged terminal evidence;
receiver-scoped gateway
idempotency
Duplicate or conflicting evidence
can move the same reservation
twice, or one transport retry can
create multiple logical outcomes
Exactly-once delivery or honesty of
an arbitrary third-party receiver
Effect coverage and
external exposure
bound
Authenticated binding, atomic
durable ownership, and stable
decisions (1–3);
persist-before-exposure; sound
normalization (4); enforced
maximum-charge contract (6);
fenced queryable gateway (5);
complete non-equivocating
terminal evidence (7); complete
mediation (9)
An effect can bypass its obligation,
alias another effect identity, or be
refunded on a false result
Coverage of covert,
direct-credential, or otherwise
unmediated effects
Late-completion safety
and reclaim
Durable R→Q cut;
gateway-visible monotone epoch;
authoritative success/no-effect
result
Timeout refund or store-only
fencing permits old and new
generations to use one right
Rollback of an irreversible effect or
eventual recovery of stranded
rights
Partition confinement
Exclusive preallocation before the
cut; no unfenced cross-cut
acceptance
Disconnected branches may spend
the same cached remainder
Availability after local escrow is
exhausted
Conditional concrete
end-to-end result
Adapter preservation
(Assumption 8), a
handler-by-handler proof of
Equation (19), plus the
assumptions of each selected
abstract result
Concrete fields, write order, or
protocol keys may fail to
implement the abstract move
proved safe
Byzantine storage/gateway
tolerance, production SLOs, or
model-task quality
Table 4. Assumption–conclusion boundary for the safety results. Ledger integrity alone does not establish
external-effect conservation; the latter requires normalization, complete mediation, and a terminal-evidence-
producing fenced gateway.
7.9
What the Theorems Permit
The results intentionally permit conservative outcomes. A right may remain in T𝑔because a trans-
fer cannot be canceled safely, in Q𝑔because the receiver outcome is unknown, or in F𝑔because
an administrator retires unresolved authority. Such states reduce utilization but preserve the exact
equation and keep potential effects covered. The theorems also permit coordination during rebal-
ancing, fan-in, and reclaim. Proposition 1 shows why removing that coordination while retaining
universal partition availability would change, rather than strengthen, the safety contract.
Conversely, a perfectly conserved internal ledger does not prove that a provider reported the
true cost, that two protocol encodings normalize to the same effect, or that an agent lacked a by-
pass credential. Those are precisely the boundaries isolated by Assumptions 4, 7, and 9. The artifact
therefore tests state-machine invariants and terminal-evidence contracts as separate evidence lay-
ers. Adapter conformance remains a handler-level trace-lifting obligation; passing either tested
layer is not reported as evidence for that obligation.


Fault-Tolerant Budget Conservation in Agent Delegation
39
Available Asrc
source owns
Transit T
sealed handoff
Available Acurrent
accepted owner
Reserved R
durable, unexposed
Quarantined Q
effect may exist
Committed C
receipt settled
Available Areturn
decision-bound target
Forfeited F
never reusable
seal
cancel decision
accept decision
local reserve
reserve
expose
success: actual 𝐷𝑜
success: remainder
fenced no-effect: all 𝑋𝑜
retire
late evidence annotates
timeout refund forbidden
Fig. 3. Per-right lifecycle. A timeout can trigger reconciliation but never changes ownership. Only an au-
thenticated settlement or a fenced proof of non-execution releases a quarantined right. A success receipt
canonically partitions 𝑋𝑜: 𝐷𝑜commits, while 𝑋𝑜∖𝐷𝑜moves to the separate decision-bound ReturnTarget
box. A fenced no-effect proof moves all 𝑋𝑜to that box along a distinct dashed path. Separate source, current-
owner, and return-target boxes prevent the three ownership roles from being visually conflated.
8
Reference Architecture and Implementation Boundary
The abstract machine is intentionally independent of a database, transport, agent framework, or
model provider. This section gives a reference profile that is implementable without weakening the
proof obligations. It is not a claim that any ordinary message queue or API automatically satisfies
those obligations.
8.1
Lifecycle Realization
Figure 3 realizes one logical right as a state machine. Solid arrows show ordinary ownership
progress, including both branches of an authenticated success receipt. Dashed arrows specifically
denote exclusion/no-effect or reversal evidence; they are not a legend for every authenticated
record. There is deliberately no timeout edge from Q to A. The F bucket is absorbing; later evi-
dence may annotate its outcome but cannot reclassify or make it spendable.
8.2
Durable Records
The reference architecture requires an authoritative local store per branch. The store may itself
be replicated, provided that a successful local transaction is linearizable and durable under As-
sumption 2. Table 5 gives the minimum logical records. Fields shown as immutable participate in
a canonical digest; mutable phase fields are updated only by the transition that owns them.
SQLite executable binding.
Table 5 is a logical schema, not a claim that every field is a literal standalone SQL column. In the
compact profile, the representation map encodes the absorbing local gate as operations.state =
aborted, abort_mode = local_unexposed, and outbox.dispatchable = 0. The only dispatch
CAS requires the operation still be reserved, so this product state cannot later become dispatch-
able. The 𝑊3 CAS simultaneously records the permit authority, domain-separated permit identifier,
digest, and Ed25519 signature; no dispatchable row can have a partial permit. The logical terminal-
outcome digest is reconstructed from the terminal operation/evidence row by the independent
checker rather than stored as a separate outbox column.


40
Zhu and Wang
Record
Immutable identity/binding
Mutable state
Uniqueness or integrity rule
root_grant
root, issuer, resource schema, issued
vector, label digest
status, current policy version,
installed fence epochs
issuer signature; one issued
vector per root generation
credit
root, logical slot/reissue-chain ID,
credit ID, parent credit ID,
generation, epoch, issuer, credit
authority/owner, source-label digest,
lineage and rights commitments
available ranges, lifecycle,
current marker
immutable predecessor identity;
at most one current generation
per logical slot/reissue chain;
disjoint split siblings may be
current concurrently, but live
ranges never overlap
transfer
root, transfer ID, source generation,
destination, ranges, label
sealed / accepted / rejected /
fenced
unique (𝑟𝑜𝑜𝑡, 𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠𝑓𝑒𝑟_𝑖𝑑);
terminal decision immutable
operation
root, logical slot, operation ID, source
lineage/rights commitments, epoch,
effect digest, receiver, key, 𝛽𝑜,
maximum vector, source/operation
labels, witness, selector schema
version
reserved/quarantined/terminal
phase; write-once return target
and 𝐻(𝐷𝑜), 𝐻(𝑋𝑜∖𝐷𝑜) inside
the terminal decision
unique (𝑟𝑜𝑜𝑡, 𝑜𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛_𝑖𝑑);
immutable replay, partition, and
return binding
gateway_effect
𝑖𝑖𝑑, key, 𝛽𝑜, receiver, effect digest,
acceptance sequence
accepted/effect/terminal
outcome
one immutable acceptance
binding and at most one
instance per key
terminal_evidence
evidence ID, tagged variant, 𝛽𝑜,
root/slot/operation binding,
authority/signature; success adds 𝑖𝑖𝑑,
acceptance sequence, and actual
vector; no-effect adds fence epoch
verification result and
application time
unique evidence ID and one
compatible terminal variant per
operation
outbox
event ID, aggregate ID, payload
digest, terminal-outcome digest;
dispatch-permit authority, permit ID,
permit digest, and signature
dispatch gate: non-
dispatchable/dispatchable/local-
abort; delivery:
ready/sent/observed
inserted in the same transaction
as the state transition; permit
fields are complete iff
dispatchable; local-abort is
absorbing
audit_node
previous hash, transition digest,
authority, causal parents
publication/checkpoint state
append-only hash link; no
authority to move rights
Table 5. Logical durable records. A cryptographic audit chain detects post-hoc modification but does not
replace atomic ownership transitions.
The prototype persists a 16-field executable-beta row. Its digest preimage is the following 15-
field projection:
𝛽SQL
𝑜
= (issuer_id, root_id, credit_id, op_id, epoch, op_key,
lineage_commitment, rights_commitment, effect_digest, receiver,
max_usd, max_calls, source_label_digest, operation_label_digest, witness_digest),
and the sixteenth field is beta_digest = 𝐻(FTBC_EXECUTABLE_BETA_V1 ∥encode(𝛽SQL
𝑜
)). In this
deliberately single-chain profile, define the authenticated representation
𝜒SQL(𝑔) = 𝐻(sqlite-single-slot ∥𝑔).
Because exactly one logical slot exists per root in the profile and root_id is committed inside
both the concrete key and 𝛽SQL
𝑜
, the gateway and checker recompute the same 𝜒SQL(𝑔); the root
fence is the physical representation of the abstract fence for (𝑔, 𝜒SQL(𝑔)). No standalone slot_id
column is implied. Thus “complete executable-beta” in Section 10 means complete with respect to
this concrete prototype schema: every field and the digest are persisted or independently recom-
puted across the exercised branch, gateway, effect, and terminal-evidence rows. It does not claim
that the SQLite prototype implements the abstract atom-selector schema, nor does it discharge
the universal refinement obligation or a multi-slot adapter. That executable profile has one serial
reissue chain per root and materializes a single root.current_credit_id; this is a projection of
per-chain currentness, not a restriction on the full DAG schema, which permits pairwise-disjoint
current split siblings.


Fault-Tolerant Budget Conservation in Agent Delegation
41
The compact gateway implements the permit branch of the abstract first-acceptance guard. In
the same 𝑊3 transaction that persists R →Q and marks the outbox dispatchable, the branch per-
sists an operation-scoped Ed25519 permit over the complete 𝛽SQL
𝑜
. For an unseen key, the gateway
verifies that permit and the current root fence before atomically recording acceptance. An exact
accepted replay returns the stored decision without requiring a new permit; a durable no-effect
proof excludes later acceptance of a delayed permit. The independent checker, outside the enforce-
ment TCB, separately verifies the permit signature, ordering, and branch/gateway correspondence.
These finite traces exercise the declared guard but do not prove universal refinement for arbitrary
adapters or the complete end-to-end theorem.
When the SQLite profile creates a fresh successor during its final local abort, no-effect return, or
success settlement, the transaction simultaneously moves the predecessor’s already safe available
balance and the terminal return footprint. Its abstract image is the explicit TerminalRollover action
in Equations (17)–(18), not a purported single Settle, Return, or Reissue step.
8.3
Write Ordering and Crash Cuts
For a protected operation, the required order is:
𝑊1
=
validate current credit and joint witness,
𝑊2
=
atomically persist A→R, operation, obligation, outbox, and audit node,
𝑊3
=
atomically persist R→Q and a branch-signed permit over 𝛽𝑜,
then mark the same outbox row dispatchable in that transaction,
𝑁1
=
send through the fenced gateway,
𝑊4
=
atomically verify and settle an authoritative outcome.
A crash before 𝑊2 exposes no work and owns no reservation. A crash after 𝑊2 but before 𝑊3
leaves an unexposed reservation that local recovery can prove safe to abort. A crash after 𝑊3,
including before 𝑁1, leaves a quarantined obligation. This can sacrifice availability, but it eliminates
the opposite crash cut in which an effect exists without a charged right. A crash after 𝑁1 and
before 𝑊4 is reconciled by the canonical operation key rather than by reissuing a semantically
new request.
The outbox is therefore a durability protocol, not a statement that message delivery is exactly
once. Duplicate sends are expected. The gateway’s idempotency and receipt query turn duplicates
into observation of one logical operation.
8.4
Reference Components
The reference profile separates six logical components; the compact artifact implements the exer-
cised subset of these roles:
(1) Issuer. Validates the root authority and fixes resource units, quantization, settlement authority,
maximum-charge policy, and initial vector.
(2) Credit authority. Executes split, sealed transfer, acceptance, disjoint join, return, and epoch
transitions.
(3) Branch ledger. Executes reserve, quarantine, settlement, and retirement in local transactions.
(4) Gateway emulator. Enforces stable keys and epochs, verifies the branch-signed dispatch per-
mit before first acceptance, durably binds acceptance to 𝛽𝑜, records effect instances and accep-
tance sequences, and exposes queryable outcomes.
(5) Reconciler. Resolves nonterminal transfers and operations without interpreting timeout as
non-execution.
(6) Independent checker. Independently recomputes the declared keys, bindings, ownership to-
tals, conservation, and coverage predicates at every retained durable snapshot/prefix.


42
Zhu and Wang
Transition
Local work
Coordination
Reserve / settle
𝑂(𝑑)
one local durable transaction
Split
𝑂(𝑑+ ℓ)
one local durable transaction
Cross-store transfer
𝑂(𝑑+ ℓ)
source seal + destination accept
Join
𝑂(𝑝𝑑+ 𝑝ℓ)
one authority over all consumed
inputs
Reconcile
𝑂(𝑑) per operation
gateway query; reclaim additionally
needs fence + non-acceptance proof
Audit replay
𝑂(𝑑) per transition
none on enforcement path
Table 6. Asymptotic costs for compressed footprints. Cryptographic verification adds work proportional to
the chosen signature and commitment formats.
The checker is intentionally outside the mutation path. Agreement between runtime assertions
and an independently implemented checker is stronger evidence than either alone, but is neither a
complete abstract-transition replay nor a handler-by-handler refinement proof of the production
database or cryptography.
8.5
Concurrency and Placement
Credits are the unit of locality. Operations on disjoint credits need no shared counter and can
proceed concurrently. A branch serializes transitions for one credit generation, for example with
a row-version compare-and-swap or a local transaction lock. Cross-branch transfers serialize only
the source seal and destination acceptance; the rights remain unavailable in T between them.
A hot root does not imply a hot root row during ordinary spending. Root totals can be recon-
structed from credit and operation records or maintained as non-authoritative aggregates. Coordi-
nation is required to move unused rights between partitions, join credits at one authority, change
resource semantics, or reclaim a lost generation. This is the intended “just-right” boundary: spend-
ing preallocated rights is local; changing exclusive ownership is not.
8.6
Complexity and Metadata
Let 𝑑= |𝒦|, 𝑝be the number of parent credits in a join, ℓthe compressed lineage witness length,
and 𝑧the number of nonterminal records scanned during recovery. With range-compressed rights,
ordinary vector operations are 𝑂(𝑑); the implementation does not materialize the logical atoms of
Definition 1.
Each operation stores identifiers and digests plus 𝑂(𝑑) quantities. A transfer additionally stores
a lineage/rights commitment. Full ancestry need not travel on every request if the verifier trusts
a checkpointed Merkle or accumulator proof; that optimization changes proof format, not the
ownership invariant.
8.7
Trusted Computing Base and Profiles
The ledger profile trusts the issuer, credit/branch stores, and cryptographic verification. It proves
only internal right conservation. The mediated-effect profile additionally trusts effect normalization,
complete mediation, the fenced gateway, and terminal-evidence authority, yielding the coverage
theorem. The accounting profile may rely on a provider’s usage receipt. If the provider can omit
hidden tokens, canceled-stream usage, taxes, or asynchronous charges, the theorem covers the
reported metric rather than the eventual invoice.
An endpoint can advertise one of three capabilities:


Fault-Tolerant Budget Conservation in Agent Delegation
43
profile(𝑟) ∈{FencedQueryable, ReceiptOnly, SelfReported}.
The deployment must not silently upgrade these profiles. In particular, ReceiptOnly can
preserve no-amplification by quarantining ambiguity but cannot promise eventual release, and
SelfReported cannot support an effect-coverage claim about receiver state.
9
Evaluation Methodology
The evaluation is claim-driven and intentionally performed after the model, protocol, theorem
assumptions, and failure semantics are fixed. This order reduces the risk of fitting definitions to
favorable measurements. The artifact uses no hosted model or provider. Agent decisions are deter-
ministic event generators because the evaluated claims concern distributed ownership and settle-
ment, not task quality.
We use frozen cases, explicit oracles, and machine-readable denial reasons. The present oracle
is a distributed state invariant, and each paired variation is a crash, message, permit, or epoch
schedule rather than a natural language authorization context.
MAS-FIRE provides a complementary taxonomy and injection framework for semantic, cogni-
tive, and inter-agent coordination faults in LLM-based multi-agent systems [19]. Our evaluation
targets a different layer: durable crash cuts, duplicated or reordered protocol events, epoch fenc-
ing, and preservation of ownership and effect-accounting invariants. It does not measure reasoning
robustness.
9.1
Research Questions
RQ1: Model safety.
In the declared finite scopes, do the settlement/generation and delegation-lineage machines
preserve their stated ownership, conservation, settlement, and fencing invariants?
RQ2: Necessity.
Does timeout refund yield a short mechanism-specific counterexample, and does a com-
pound fan-in certificate-validation mutant that substitutes historical inputs and omits dis-
jointness produce the predicted ownership amplification?
RQ3: Crash-fault runtime.
Across the declared 𝑊2, gateway-acceptance, and 𝑊4 pre/post-commit cuts, duplicate receipt,
stale epoch, response loss, and pre-fence-accept/late-completion schedule, does an indepen-
dent checker find any prefix violation in the safe SQLite profile?
RQ4: Mechanism cost sanity.
Do all injected process deaths recover durable SQLite state, and what local RPC and restart
timings characterize this prototype execution? These observations are health checks, not a
comparative performance claim.
9.2
Evidence Strata
No single experiment establishes the end-to-end theorem. We therefore use four deliberately sep-
arated evidence strata:
(1) two complementary TLA+ specifications explored by TLC: one for settlement/generation re-
covery and one for lineage/fan-in [25];
(2) a dependency-free JavaScript encoding that exhausts the same declared settlement scope and
runs named schedules;
(3) two SQLite service processes, driven through separate durable files, with real SIGKILL cuts
and an independent newline-delimited JSON (JSONL) trace checker; and


44
Zhu and Wang
(4) lightweight local RPC/restart timing captured while those correctness schedules execute.
The TLA+ and JavaScript artifacts are separate executable encodings, not independent concep-
tual specifications. The SQLite checker imports neither encoding, protocol implementation, SQL,
scenario, nor oracle module; it recomputes properties from durable snapshots. This reduces, but
cannot eliminate, common-specification error. None of the strata proves an arbitrary deployment,
endpoint, database, signature library, or the universal trace-lifting obligation in Equation (19).
The settlement TLA+ and JavaScript encodings deliberately type each logical unit with one loca-
tion. Their ExactConservation check is therefore a transition-accounting and regression sanity
check, not independent evidence for the manuscript’s raw-relation ownership-partition lemma.
The hand proof establishes that lemma without a location-function type; the complementary lin-
eage model can represent multiple tagged occurrences and its mutant exercises that multiplicity.
We do not report bounded state counts as a machine-checked proof of arbitrary raw-relation own-
ership.
9.3
Analytical Comparison Points
The following mechanisms structure the threat and novelty comparison; they are not presented as
measured reimplementations:
(1) Read–check–decrement. Replicated remaining balances with last-writer-wins merge; this
isolates the invariant-convergence error.
(2) Central linearizable counter. One Raft-style authoritative decrement and settlement record
[34]; safe when reachable, unavailable to isolated branches.
(3) Static escrow / Bounded Counter profile. Rights are preallocated and never dynamically
reclaimed during faults [5]; this is the strongest numeric baseline.
(4) Affine local budget. A single-process move-only credit modeled after Token Budgets [22];
cross-process crash state is outside its type envelope.
(5) Allocation-contract monitor. Child vectors must sum within the parent as in Agent Con-
tracts [48], but external execution has no durable obligation.
(6) Shared replay registry. AIP/AAT-style attenuated tokens plus a linearizable operation-ID
registry; this prevents some replay but lacks exclusive consumable transfer semantics.
(7) Fail-closed coordinator. MPAC-style centralized current state rejects mutation while the co-
ordinator is unavailable [37].
(8) Proposed profile. Exclusive credit lineage plus reserve/quarantine/terminal-evidence settle-
ment and gateway fencing.
RIFL, Beldi, and ExoFlow are architectural reference points for durable completion records and
exactly-once workflows [27, 49, 54]. The reference artifact evaluates this paper’s conservation and
crash-cut obligations; these systems remain architectural comparison points rather than reimple-
mented performance baselines.
9.4
Finite Scopes and Concrete Schedules
The settlement/generation model contains two logical atoms, two actors, epochs and operation
generations 0..1, transfer seal/accept/verified cancel, reserve, dispatch, timeout, gateway effect,
settlement, fencing, verified abort, successor-generation reuse, forfeiture, crash, and restart. The
JavaScript encoding explores the complete reachable graph of the same finite abstraction and ex-
ecutes named traces. Those settlement models sequence terminal resolution and ordinary reissue;
they do not contain a separate fused TerminalRollover transition. The fused action is covered by
the inductive proof and the selected SQLite transactions, not by a claimed TLC/JavaScript bisimu-
lation.


Fault-Tolerant Budget Conservation in Agent Delegation
45
Fault injection
point
Ambiguity created
Required safe state
Bug exposed if
weakened
After reserve commit,
before dispatchable
No exposure possible by
durable evidence
R, then verified abort
leaked reservation or
unsafe send without
outbox
After quarantine
commit, before send
Send may not have
happened
Q until gateway proof
utilization loss if safe;
double spend if blindly
refunded
After gateway effect,
before reply
Effect exists, response
absent
Q, then receipt
settlement
timeout-refund/late-
effect overspend
After receipt arrival,
before ledger commit
Receipt can replay
same settlement
applied once
duplicate charge or
duplicate remainder
During sealed transfer
Source debited,
destination unknown
T until
accept/exclusion
both-side ownership
after retry
During epoch advance
Old worker may retain
credentials
old gateway requests
fenced
stale-generation spend
after reclaim
During fan-in
Two references may share
ancestry or be stale
require current active
inputs, reject overlap,
and consume
atomically
join amplification
During partial-vector
settlement
Actual charge smaller than
maximum
commit exact subset;
return authenticated
remainder
invented remainder or
cross-dimension
substitution
Table 7. Required crash and concurrency cuts. Each outcome is checked after every durable prefix, not only
after recovery completes.
The complementary lineage model contains two dimensions (usd and tokens), two rights per
dimension, root/left/right/join credits, generations 0..2, epochs 0..1, an atomic disjoint split, a legal
current-input fan-in, and sequential full transfers and returns. The safe join consumes the two cur-
rent, active, pairwise-disjoint branches atomically; a retained reachability witness confirms that
this legal join is not vacuously disabled. The sequential workflow separately produces two overlap-
ping historical return certificates without duplicating live ownership. The safe model never treats
those stale certificates as join inputs. A deliberately compound validation mutant both substitutes
them for current active inputs and omits their disjointness check; its counterexample must there-
fore not be interpreted as isolating either check independently.
The concrete SQLite profile issues vector (100, 2) in dimensions usd and calls. It runs ten
safe cases and one timeout-refund mutant. Each case creates fresh branch and gateway databases.
The safe schedules cover pre/post-commit death at 𝑊2, pre/post-commit death at 𝑊3, pre/post-
commit death at gateway acceptance, effect persistence with reply loss, pre/post-commit death
at 𝑊4, receipt replay, stale-epoch rejection, and a request accepted before a fence that completes
after it. Table 7 states the broader protocol cuts and identifies which are exercised by which artifact
layer.
The SQLite layer uses real process death at the 𝑊2 reservation transaction, the 𝑊3 quaran-
tine/permit transaction, the separate gateway-acceptance transaction, effect/reply-loss cut, and
𝑊4 settlement transaction; it also exercises stale-epoch rejection and pre-fence acceptance fol-
lowed by late completion. Transfer cancellation and partial charge are likewise exercised in the
executable settlement traces; the lineage model exercises a legal current fan-in plus an invalid


46
Zhu and Wang
historical-certificate path. These scopes are reported separately so model-level coverage is not
mistaken for a distributed runtime implementation of transfer or DAG join.
9.5
Metrics
The primary safety metrics are counts of:
𝑉own = #ownership-partition violations,
𝑉sum = #bucket-conservation violations,
𝑉cover = #uncovered or multiply covered effects,
𝑉bound = #external-exposure bound violations,
𝑉settle = #conflicting/double settlements,
𝑉epoch = #accepted stale-generation effects.
All must be zero for the proposed safe profile. Mutation success is the opposite: each inten-
tionally weakened rule must produce at least one independently validated counterexample in a
schedule that exercises the weakened assumption.
Capacity state can be reported as:
𝑠𝑇= ‖T‖1
‖B‖1
,
𝑠𝑄= ‖Q‖1
‖B‖1
,
𝑠𝐹= ‖F‖1
‖B‖1
.
For the concrete artifact, restart time is measured from process death to a ready service against
the same database. We report only RPC sample count, per-case median/p95, and aggregate restart
median captured by the correctness run. We do not infer throughput, tail SLOs, capacity, or com-
parative overhead from those samples. Safety is never combined with timing into one score.
9.6
Decision Rules and Statistical Treatment
Bounded model checking is reported as explored distinct states, generated states, depth/diameter
when available, completed search status, and invariant violations. A zero count means no coun-
terexample exists in that declared finite scope; it is not reported as an unbounded proof.
Deterministic transition and fault cases are pass/fail with an exact case manifest. The local tim-
ings are descriptive observations over the RPCs and restarts that actually occur in those cases;
there is no warm-up, random-sampling model, confidence interval, or hypothesis test. Runtime,
hardware, SQLite version, topology, and the fact that CLI process startup is included are recorded
with the results.
9.7
Predeclared Interpretation Boundaries
The following outcomes would narrow or falsify claims:
• any safe-model or proposed-runtime prefix with 𝑉own + 𝑉sum > 0 falsifies ledger conservation;
• any mediated gateway effect without exactly one bound Q/C/F obligation falsifies effect cov-
erage;
• a mutant not detected within the exercised scope weakens evidence for necessity and must be
reported rather than reclassified;
• a timeout-only reclaim that appears safe merely indicates the schedule omitted the delayed-
effect twin;
• provider self-reported usage cannot validate actual invoice bounds;
• fault-free microbenchmark speed cannot establish fault tolerance; and
• a bounded TLC completion cannot establish correctness outside its constants or assumptions.


Fault-Tolerant Budget Conservation in Agent Delegation
47
Evidence
Declared finite scope
Generated or
edges
Distinct
states
Depth
Safe outcome
Settlement TLC
2 atoms, 2 actors, epochs/generations 0..1
54,477
16,592
29
exhausted; no violation
Lineage TLC
2 dimensions, 4 rights, 4 credits
23
21
8
exhausted; no violation
JavaScript graph
2 atoms, 2 actors, complete reachable
graph
54,476
16,592
28
exhausted; no violation
Table 8. Completed bounded safety checks. The generated-or-edges column denotes TLC generated states
for the TLA+ rows and explored transitions for JavaScript. Completion applies only to the constants shown.
Weakening
Detection
Shortest retained
witness
Observed failure
Timeout refund after exposure
TLC and JavaScript
TLC depth 4; JS depths 3
and 5
unsafe reclaim; then loss of effect coverage after
the accepted request completes late
Historical-certificate validation
(compound)
lineage TLC
6 states
ownership uniqueness; 8 live occurrences for 4
rights (maximum multiplicity 2)
Table 9. Targeted mutant results. Witness lengths are breadth-first counterexamples in the declared finite
models, not field-failure probabilities. The historical-certificate row weakens both currentness and disjoint-
ness validation.
9.8
Reproducibility Protocol
The artifact entry point runs formal exploration, mutation, named transition, fault injection, ag-
gregation, and internal consistency checks in that order. Every result file records the command,
source digest, seed or schedule ID, runtime version, start/end time, and declared scope. Gener-
ated LaTeX tables are derived from JSON results; hand-entered benchmark numbers are forbidden.
Appendix F gives the exact commands and expected artifacts.
10
Evaluation Results
10.1
Bounded Model-Checking Results
All three safe finite graphs completed with an empty work queue and no invariant violation. The
settlement TLC model explored 54,477 generated and 16,592 distinct states; the JavaScript encoding
reached the same count of 16,592 distinct states. Equality of counts does not establish equality of
state sets, a bisimulation, or independent specification evidence; it is only a coarse cross-encoding
consistency check.
The separate expected-failure reachability profile retained a 3-state legal current-input join wit-
ness. Both inputs were active, their live footprints were pairwise disjoint and covered all 4 rights,
and the output retained multiplicity one. This establishes that the safe join action was reachable;
it is not a safety counterexample.
The deterministic executable suite then ran 19 named schedules (132 scheduled steps). All 18 safe
schedules passed with zero final invariant violations, including gateway acceptance before a fence
followed by completion after the fence, and the corresponding forfeiture case. These schedules test
particular executions; they do not enlarge the exhaustive finite scope.
10.2
Targeted Necessity Checks
Both predeclared weakened mechanisms produced short, mechanism-specific counterexamples.
The lineage mutant is compound: it substitutes returned historical certificates for current active
inputs and bypasses pairwise disjointness validation. It must not be interpreted as an overlap-only
ablation.


48
Zhu and Wang
Safe schedule
Kills
Records
Checker
W2 pre-commit rollback
1
29
pass
W2 post-commit recovery
1
23
pass
gateway-accept pre-commit rollback/retry
1
33
pass
gateway-accept post-commit dedupe
1
24
pass
effect/reply loss; W4 pre-commit
2
29
pass
W4 post-commit dedupe
1
27
pass
stale epoch rejection
0
39
pass
pre-fence accept; late completion
0
30
pass
W3 pre-commit rollback
1
25
pass
W3 post-commit permit recovery
1
25
pass
Table 10. Independent checks over ten concrete safe traces. Each case uses fresh branch-ledger and gateway
databases.
10.3
Multi-Process Crash-Fault Results
The concrete artifact executed 10/10 safe SQLite cases without a prefix violation under the
independent checker. It injected 9 actual SIGKILL process deaths and retained 313 JSONL
records. The checker also detected the timeout-refund mutant through dispatch_coverage,
effect_coverage, and effect_budget_bound. It recomputed 25 canonical keys and 59 complete
executable-beta rows, verified 11 signed success receipts and 1 signed no-effect proof, and checked
14 terminal return decisions including 3 fresh successors. All 12 negative handler assertions were
observed without durable mutation.
The compact gateway enforces the evaluated first-acceptance guard online: the branch persists
and signs an operation-scoped dispatch permit in the same 𝑊3 transaction that moves the reser-
vation to quarantine, and the gateway verifies and records that permit before accepting an unseen
key. Exact replay returns the stored outcome, while a later authoritative no-effect proof excludes
acceptance of a delayed permit. The independent checker separately recomputes permit signatures
and cross-store dispatch coverage from the trace. These finite schedules validate the reference pro-
file; they do not prove universal refinement for arbitrary runtime adapters.
All 22/22 retained SQLite databases returned ok from PRAGMA integrity_check. This is evi-
dence that the captured crash cuts left readable database images; it is not a proof of SQLite in-
ternals. The safe late-completion case binds the gateway-assigned effect instance and acceptance
sequence through settlement and moves its partial remainder to a fresh, same-lineage successor
rather than the stale source. The stale-epoch case separately exercises local unexposed abort and
gateway-proved no-effect return; both create fresh successors only after predecessor closure and
exact reusable-balance computation.
The correctness run collected 111 local RPC samples. Per-case medians ranged from 9.702 to
12.007 ms, the largest per-case p95 was 28.111 ms, and the 9 restart observations had median 30.76
ms. These measurements include local process and SQLite CLI startup and serve only as mechanism
health checks; they establish neither throughput nor a production latency SLO.
10.4
Interpretation and Residual Limits
The result is bounded but falsifiable: zero safe violations in the declared finite models, zero
violations across all 10 retained safe runtime traces, and detection of both targeted weakenings. It
does not establish liveness, Byzantine tolerance, production cryptographic assurance or receipt-
authority integrity, arbitrary runtime refinement, cross-store credit transfer, or DAG join in the
SQLite prototype. In particular, the SQLite profile exercises the implemented first-acceptance
guard but does not furnish a universal handler-level refinement proof for GatewayAccept or the
conditional end-to-end theorem. Its fused terminal-settlement/successor transactions have the


Fault-Tolerant Budget Conservation in Agent Delegation
49
explicit analytical image TerminalRollover, but no universal handler simulation proof is claimed.
The Ed25519 fixture exercises authentication and negative verification paths but provides no
production key isolation. External-effect claims remain conditional on a cooperating, idempotent,
fenced, and queryable gateway with complete mediation.
11
Security Analysis
11.1
Safety Against a Malicious or Confused Agent
The agent is not trusted to report a balance, choose a credit generation, forge terminal evidence,
or decide that a timeout is a refund. It may emit arbitrarily many proposals, retries, delegations,
cancellations, and joins. The branch store accepts a proposal only if the current credit exclusively
owns the selected footprint, the label and joint witness authorize the normalized effect, and the
immutable operation binding either does not yet exist or matches exactly. Consequently, prompt
injection can influence the proposed action but cannot by itself duplicate a right.
A compromised worker can still waste its own authorized escrow by reserving unproductive
work, creating indeterminate obligations, or intentionally withholding completion. Conservation
is a safety property, not a defense against budget denial. Deployments need rate limits, per-child
reservation caps, bounded delegation depth, admission control, and human escalation for large or
long-lived quarantines.
11.2
Replay, Equivocation, and Identifier Substitution
Every transfer, operation, and terminal-evidence item has a stable identifier, but identifier unique-
ness alone is insufficient. The branch/gateway enforcement verifier, which is inside the safety TCB,
recomputes the single canonical operation binding in Equation (6), including the selector schema
version 𝜈sel, and rejects any field mismatch. Transfers use their separate domain-separated certifi-
cate and decision binding; they are not silently interpreted through the operation formula. The
independent audit verifier in Figure 2 is outside the TCB and can detect divergence but cannot
make an unsafe request safe. An exact replay is a stutter. Reuse of an identifier with a different
tuple is an equivocation and is rejected. Domain separation prevents an operation ID from being
reinterpreted as a transfer or receipt ID. Receiver and effect class are included so two services
cannot accidentally share an idempotency namespace.
Settlement also binds where unused rights may return. A target must satisfy Equation (7): it
has the same root, is a successor of the source lineage that is current in the committed successor
state under the settlement authority, and has a label no broader than the source credit. An agent
therefore cannot use a valid partial receipt to redirect the remainder into an unrelated, broader, or
stale credit.
Terminal-evidence equivocation is detected when two authenticated terminal outcomes bind the
same operation. Under Assumption 7, at most one can be valid. If a deployed terminal-evidence
authority can sign inconsistent outcomes, the main effect theorem no longer applies; the ledger
can quarantine the conflict, preserve no-amplification, and expose evidence, but cannot establish
receiver truth.
11.3
Stale Generations and Split Brain
Epoch fencing protects against a lost controller or worker that later resumes. The critical check is
at the last trusted boundary before the effect, not only at the branch database. A gateway accepts
a new request for (𝑐𝑖𝑑, 𝜂) only while that generation is current. After an authenticated 𝜂+ > 𝜂is
installed, it may return the already recorded result for an old idempotency key but must reject a
new old-generation effect.


50
Zhu and Wang
If two authorities can independently declare themselves current for the same credit generation,
exclusive ownership is already violated. Consensus, single-writer placement, or another correct
ownership service is required within that authority. The protocol confines this requirement to
ownership changes; it does not solve consensus and does not claim Byzantine split-brain tolerance.
11.4
External-Effect Ambiguity
The most consequential attack surface is a receiver that completes work and drops or falsifies
the response. The safe response is not to guess. Under the fenced-queryable profile, reconciliation
obtains the recorded result. Under the receipt-only profile, missing evidence leaves the right in Q
or eventually F. Under self-report, only the internal ledger claim survives.
This tiering follows the same fundamental requirement as systems that provide exactly-once
RPC or workflow execution: a completion record must be durably coupled to the mutation or
returned by a cooperating transactional endpoint [27, 49, 54]. A client-side retry library cannot
manufacture that coupling for an arbitrary third party.
11.5
Underreporting and Variable Charges
A maximum reservation u is sound only if the gateway can prevent an actual charge above it.
For a paid API, that can mean preauthorization, provider-side hard caps, chunked metering with
renewal, or reserving the maximum billable unit. If the provider reveals usage only afterward and
may exceed u, no local algorithm can prove a hard bound on the real charge. The appropriate
choices are to refuse the hard-bound profile, reserve a conservative worst case, or state a softer
monitoring claim.
Partial settlement is safe when the receipt authenticates d ⪯u. The remainder returns only
after that receipt. For streaming calls, the gateway can use successive sub-operations with separate
reserved chunks; canceling a stream is not itself a zero-charge receipt.
11.6
Normalization and Path Aliasing
Two syntactically different requests may cause the same effect, while two similar strings may
address different recipients or preconditions. Normalize is therefore part of the trusted policy
boundary. Its test obligations include canonical encoding, default parameters, redirects, indirect
identifiers, locale and unit conversion, recipient resolution, protocol-specific retries, and relevant
domain preconditions. Unknown semantics fail closed.
Complete mediation is equally important [39]. An agent with direct cloud credentials can bypass
an MCP proxy; a browser can activate an effect through a UI path; a tool can invoke a second tool
internally. The theorem covers only credentials and routes that the deployment actually interposes.
Network egress policy, workload identity, receiver-side enforcement, and credential isolation are
deployment controls, not consequences of the budget data structure.
11.7
Audit Integrity and Rollback
A hash-linked log reveals deletion or reordering relative to a trusted checkpoint, but a compro-
mised store could roll back both state and its local log. Production profiles should bind store gen-
eration, credit epoch, and checkpoint sequence to a monotonic external witness, replicated log,
hardware counter, or consensus state. This strengthens forensic detection; exclusive ownership
still depends on the authoritative transition service.
Audit records contain sensitive purpose, recipient, spend, and graph metadata. The default evi-
dence plane should use digests and stable opaque identifiers, encrypt detailed receipts at rest, sep-
arate operational and audit roles, and enforce retention and deletion policies. Public verifiability
does not justify publishing task content.


Fault-Tolerant Budget Conservation in Agent Delegation
51
Attack or failure
Prevented or detected
by
Residual consequence
Outside the theorem
Duplicate child
allocation
atomic exclusive split +
stable ID
duplicate request stutters
corrupt authoritative
store
Lineage alias at
fan-in
disjoint rights
commitment + input
consumption
join rejected
unsound commitment
implementation
Dispatch replay
operation binding +
gateway idempotency
prior outcome returned
non-cooperating receiver
Timeout refund race
Q retention +
reconciliation
stranded capacity
guaranteed eventual
receiver response
Stale worker
gateway-visible epoch
fence
old request rejected or
observed
direct credentials
bypassing gateway
Forged/changed
receipt
signature and full
binding verification
quarantine and
investigation
compromised
terminal-evidence
authority
Provider
underreporting
authenticated hard-cap
profile
weaker reported-usage
claim
correctness of an
arbitrary invoice
Audit rollback
external checkpoint /
monotonic epoch
detect or confine
rollback
Byzantine consensus if
not deployed
Reservation flooding
per-child caps and
admission policy
availability loss within
authorized escrow
agent usefulness or fair
allocation
Table 11. Security coverage and residual risk. The protocol prefers explicit loss of utility to an unsupported
conservation claim.
12
Related Work Beyond the Closest Mechanisms
12.1
Agent Economies and Governance Receipts
EpochX treats tasks as bounties, supports recursive budgeted delegation, and uses lock and settle
operations [46]. It is therefore direct prior art for hierarchical economic allocation; our focus is the
failure semantics around duplicate delivery, persistent ownership, quarantine, fencing, and late
settlement that are not established by EpochX’s reported model and evaluation. AgentBound cen-
tralizes pre-execution governance and emits signed governance receipts [21]. Those receipts attest
to a policy decision, while our effect receipt attests to a receiver outcome and actual charge. Human
Delegation Provenance (HDP), a lightweight cryptographic protocol, provides human-delegation
provenance, while Aegon proposes ledger-bound tokens with attested receipts [6, 10]. We do not
claim the first delegation chain, ledger token, or signed receipt.
Agent Contracts and Token Budgets are the nearest resource-governance works [22, 48]. Their
allocation law and affine ownership discipline motivate our model. The contribution here begins
where one process or one allocation snapshot stops being authoritative: ownership must survive
messages, durable crash cuts, joins, and uncertain effects.
12.2
Authorization Delegation
OAuth token exchange and Rich Authorization Requests provide standardized building blocks for
audience-bound exchange and structured authorization [20, 29]. AIP and the current AAT Internet-
Draft extend these ideas to agent identity and attenuating chains [32, 36]; Overlaying Governance
formalizes policy composition [18]. These answer which actions remain permitted. Our credits add
linear consumption: two equally attenuated children must not both own the same last unit.


52
Zhu and Wang
Resource-bounded temporal logics have long represented strategies constrained by consumable
or producible resources [2]. Our problem is operational rather than strategic: it specifies how au-
thenticated rights move and settle under crash and partition. The logical connection is useful, but
a model-checking semantics does not supply durable message protocols by itself.
12.3
Escrow, CRDTs, and Mobile Rights
Escrow transactions reserve rights so concurrent transactions preserve a numeric invariant [33].
Mobile escrow distributes rights to occasionally disconnected clients [23]. Bounded Counter
CRDTs provide a particularly strong construction for partition-local decrement and rights trans-
fer [5]. Just-Right Consistency combines such mechanisms with analysis that coordinates only
invariant-sensitive operations [42].
We adopt, rather than rename, this lineage. The extension is that an agent credit carries an au-
thorization label and dynamic delegation lineage, the task graph can join without merging aliased
rights, and a spent unit remains coupled to an external-effect obligation through uncertainty. A
numeric counter that converges to a valid value can still miss a duplicated payment or disclosure.
12.4
Transactions, Workflows, and Exactly-Once Semantics
Sagas decompose long-lived transactions into steps and compensations [12]; Atomix specializes
transactional semantics to agent tool use [31]. RIFL couples request IDs with durable completion
records [27]. Beldi supplies fault-tolerant transactional serverless workflows, and ExoFlow targets
exactly-once DAG execution [49, 54]. These systems demonstrate that replay safety is a storage
and endpoint property, not a property of a prompt.
Our theorem is narrower in one dimension and broader in another. It does not claim a universal
exactly-once workflow. It proves at-most-once settlement and continuous charged coverage for
consumable delegated authority, including the safe but unavailable outcome in which an arbitrary
effect cannot be authoritatively resolved.
12.5
Coordination and Impossibility
CAP rules out simultaneous strong consistency and availability for every request during arbi-
trary partitions [13]; FLP limits deterministic consensus progress in an asynchronous system
with a crash [11]. Invariant confluence and the Coordination Criterion more directly character-
ize when application correctness permits coordination-free execution [4, 16]. Our Proposition 1 is
an application-specific consequence: exclusive preallocation permits local work, while creating or
reallocating a shared spendable unit requires coordination or blocking.
13
Discussion
13.1
What Is Actually Conserved?
The object conserved is authenticated authorization capacity, not money or physical energy. A
dollar dimension means “authority to cause up to one dollar of charges under a named settlement
rule.” If taxes, exchange rates, tips, later adjustments, or hidden provider usage are outside that
rule, they are outside the invariant. A rigorous deployment must define each dimension’s unit,
rounding, maximum charge, authority, and reconciliation semantics before issuing it.
The exact equality in Equation (8) is stronger and more diagnostic than merely checking C ⪯B.
It distinguishes spendable, moving, not-yet-exposed, uncertain, consumed, and sacrificed capacity.
Operators can therefore see whether apparent under-spending is true availability or merely hidden
stranding.


Fault-Tolerant Budget Conservation in Agent Delegation
53
13.2
Why Keep Both R and Q?
Combining reserved and indeterminate rights preserves the numeric equation, but loses a crucial
recovery fact. A durable R record whose outbox provably never became dispatchable can be locally
returned. A Q record may correspond to a real effect and needs external evidence. The separation
turns a crash cut into an auditable transition and prevents a generic “release pending reservations”
job from creating authority.
13.3
Safety, Liveness, and Economic Utility
The protocol’s safety is prefix-closed; its liveness is conditional. A branch can progress during
partition while it has suitable local rights and a reachable gateway. Once exhausted, it blocks even
if another partition has idle capacity. A quarantined right can remain unavailable forever. These are
not incidental implementation shortcomings but consequences of refusing to guess about exclusive
ownership or external effects.
Allocation policy can reduce the cost: assign escrow proportional to expected demand, keep
small emergency reserves in multiple zones, rebalance before known disconnections, and choose
queryable endpoints for large effects. Dynamic prediction may improve utilization but must not
enter the safety theorem.
13.4
Vectors and Conversion
Vectors prevent a worker from exchanging, for example, ten low-risk reads for one high-risk write
without authorization. Some applications legitimately convert resources: a dollar cap may pur-
chase token calls, or a global risk budget may be divided among effect classes. Such conversion is
a new protected effect. It needs a signed rate/rounding contract, consumes source rights, creates
target rights once, and preserves a declared value invariant. Without that extra contract, conver-
sion is undefined rather than inferred.
13.5
DAG Tasks, Forest-Owned Rights
Task dependencies and budget ownership should remain different graphs. A synthesis agent can
read results from many parents without owning their remainders. When it needs budget, each
input branch may transfer a disjoint credit or one authority may perform an atomic join. This
design prevents the common error of summing balances associated with incoming task edges.
At large scale, full atom-set proofs are impractical. Range certificates, bounded-counter rights
matrices, or cryptographic commitments can compress the footprint. The implementation must
nevertheless expose a disjointness witness and consume each input generation exactly once.
13.6
Standards Integration
The protocol does not require a new wire protocol. AIP/AAT or OAuth can carry identity and at-
tenuated scope; MCP or A2A can carry opaque credit and operation bindings; HTTP idempotency
or conditional writes can implement a gateway primitive. Standardization value lies in a common
semantic profile:
• authenticated resource schema and maximum-charge semantics;
• stable root, logical-slot, transfer, credit-generation, operation, and terminal-evidence IDs;
• immutable binding digest and the per-slot current epoch/fence;
• endpoint capability declaration;
• terminal outcomes including verified no-effect and forfeiture; and
• machine-readable reason codes for conservative refusal.


54
Zhu and Wang
Interoperability testing should verify refinement of these meanings, not only JSON shape com-
patibility.
13.7
Deployment Migration
A practical rollout can proceed in increasing assurance:
(1) instrument existing agents with stable operation IDs and observed usage, making no hard-
bound claim;
(2) move counters into a durable branch ledger and reserve before effects;
(3) route high-impact effects through idempotent, queryable gateways;
(4) introduce exclusive child credits and disable copyable numeric “remaining” fields as authori-
ties;
(5) add epoch fencing, disjoint joins, reconciliation, and an independent trace verifier; and
(6) publish only claims supported by the endpoint profile actually deployed.
Legacy direct paths remain outside complete mediation until credentials and egress controls
make bypass impossible.
14
Limitations and Validity
14.1
Model Limitations
The base model assumes crash faults, authenticated records, one correct local linearization point
per branch, and a finite natural vector. It does not model Byzantine stores, signature compromise,
side channels, probabilistic settlement, debt, negative balances, interest, speculative credit, or cross-
root netting. Two independently authenticated roots are distinct authorizations; an issuer that
accidentally signs overlapping grants can overspend a real-world cap without violating either per-
root equation. Issuer-level escrow is required for an aggregate cap. The logical-atom construction
is a proof device; a faulty compression or commitment scheme can violate the implementation
mapping.
Recent work on distributed agent governance under a compromised provider studies Byzantine
replication, monitoring, auditing, and hybrid defenses [26]. Its adversary is outside our base theo-
rem: we assume correct authoritative stores, gateways, and evidence services and establish safety
only for the declared crash, retry, and partition model. The two guarantees are complementary
rather than ordered by strength.
The end-to-end effect theorem depends on sound normalization, complete mediation, an enforce-
able maximum-charge contract, gateway fencing/idempotency, and complete non-equivocating
terminal evidence. These are substantial assumptions. The ledger theorem remains useful when
some fail, but it must not be presented as conservation of actual external cost.
14.2
Formal-Method Limitations
The inductive proofs establish the mathematical transition system. TLA+/TLC and the independent
explorer cover only their declared finite constants, fault schedules, and modeled transitions. State-
space completion increases confidence in the specification and detects regressions; it is not a proof
of database durability, transport authentication, cryptographic libraries, or unmodeled adapters.
In particular, the settlement TLA+ and JavaScript encodings assign each logical unit one loca-
tion by type. Their exact-sum invariant checks transition bookkeeping but cannot represent the
duplicate-tag raw states excluded by the ownership-partition proof. The lineage encoding admits
origin-tag multiplicity and detects its compound fan-in mutant, but it is still a bounded model
rather than a mechanized proof of the full raw-relation semantics.


Fault-Tolerant Budget Conservation in Agent Delegation
55
The trace-lifting result defines the criterion that every runtime handler must satisfy. A concrete
event such as a receiver redirect or background retry outside the gateway must appear in the
mapping; otherwise the deployment does not inherit the theorem. The SQLite profile discharges
the exercised first-acceptance permit and crash-cut obligations. Production deployments must add
a handler-by-handler discharge of Equation (19), supported where appropriate by verified storage
procedures, refinement types, or proof-carrying adapters.
14.3
Experimental Limitations
The provider-free artifact isolates distributed-control behavior and supports deterministic internal
verification. Its measurements characterize the stated formal scopes, named crash windows, and
one local implementation and host. Model quality, real-provider accounting, Internet-scale latency,
multi-region database failover, operator response, production failure frequency, and capacity plan-
ning are separate evaluation targets.
The most important negative result is structural and does not depend on benchmark scale: with-
out endpoint cooperation, a lost response cannot distinguish non-execution from completed exe-
cution. Experiments can demonstrate the race but cannot remove it.
14.4
Construct and External Validity
“Budget” spans tokens, currency, calls, disclosures, and risk units. These dimensions differ in me-
tering authority and reversibility. Results transfer only when the deployment supplies a conser-
vative maximum and an authoritative settlement relation. Quantization can over-reserve; coarse
units trade utility for simple guarantees.
The 2026 agent papers discussed here are recent and several are preprints or an Internet-Draft.
Their reported systems and terminology may evolve. We use them to set a conservative novelty
boundary, not as proof of deployment prevalence. Classical escrow, invariant-confluence, lease,
and workflow literature remains the stronger foundation.
14.5
Internal Validity
Independent implementations, mutation tests with expected counterexamples, prefix checks,
stable result manifests, and explicit claim/evidence mapping reduce correlated specification risk
across the formal model, runtime, checker, and generated tables. Artifact results are regenerated
from source; every failed or skipped case is reported.
15
Ethics and Responsible Deployment
Budget enforcement can reduce financial loss, excessive API use, unauthorized disclosure, and
repeated high-impact effects. It can also create false confidence. A green ledger does not prove
that a planner chose a beneficial action, that a price was fair, that a recipient was appropriate,
or that complete mediation actually held. Interfaces should display endpoint profile, quarantined
capacity, unresolved effects, and assumption failures alongside a remaining balance.
Fine-grained receipts and delegation graphs reveal organizational structure, purposes, recipi-
ents, spending patterns, and potentially sensitive content. Evidence minimization, separation of
duties, access logging, encryption, retention limits, and deletion procedures are necessary. Cryp-
tographic commitments can reduce disclosure but do not make metadata harmless.
Conservative quarantine can be abused to deny service or trap a competitor’s shared capacity.
Issuers should cap the budget one child can reserve, define escalation and forfeiture authority,
record human overrides as new authorizations, and avoid automatic punitive decisions based solely
on an ambiguous external outcome or unverified assertion. The mechanism allocates authority; it
does not decide whose goals deserve resources.


56
Zhu and Wang
16
Conclusion
Distributed agent delegation turns a budget from a number into a fault-tolerant authorization
object. Parent/child allocation inequalities, affine local types, attenuated scopes, idempotency keys,
or convergent counters each solve part of the problem. None alone prevents a refunded timeout
from colliding with a late effect, an aliased fan-in from reminting capacity, or a stale worker from
spending a reclaimed generation.
We introduced a protocol in which exclusive, labeled credit moves through a delegation lineage;
a protected effect is reserved before exposure; ambiguity is quarantined; and one idempotent ter-
minal decision applies authenticated evidence at most once. A success receipt releases only its
authenticated remainder. Full return from an exposed obligation requires a receiver-visible fence
together with authoritative proof that the exact binding was never accepted and never occurred.
The six-bucket equation keeps spendable, moving, reserved, uncertain, committed, and forfeited
rights explicit. Under stated assumptions, distinct effect instances are injectively covered, and set-
tled actual charge plus conservative outstanding exposure is bounded by the issued root vector. The
construction also preserves ledger conservation, descendant non-amplification, late-completion
safety, and partition confinement.
The central systems result is precise: local availability comes from rights allocated before a par-
tition, while uncertainty must remain charged until evidence resolves it. A system that hides this
cost by refunding on timeout does not conserve authority; it merely delays discovery of the over-
spend.
Data, Code, and Materials Availability
The public preprint package contains the manuscript source and bibliography. The formal spec-
ification, bounded explorer, mutation suite, fault schedules, SQLite traces, trace checker, result
aggregator, and digest manifest are maintained as a deterministic, provider-free research artifact
using only synthetic identifiers and effects. Appendix F records its commands, declared scope, and
expected outputs so the reported evidence can be audited against the frozen internal release. The
executable artifact is not distributed with this preprint and no public archival URL is claimed.
Author Contributions
Both authors contributed to problem formulation, system design, formalization, analysis, artifact
review, and manuscript preparation. The machine-readable manifest separates generated evidence
from source and records the verification commands used for the reported results.
Competing Interests
The authors are affiliated with Accentrust, which develops agent-governance technology. The pa-
per’s claims are restricted to the stated formal assumptions and accompanying artifact; no produc-
tion deployment claim is made.
A
Notation and Semantic Domains
Table 12 collects symbols used by the abstract model. A bold quantity is a resource vector; a set-
valued footprint denotes logical rights. All vector relations are componentwise unless an authen-
ticated conversion contract explicitly says otherwise.
B
Complete Abstract Transition Contract
Tables 13–14 make the proof-relevant preconditions and postconditions explicit. “Same atoms”
means identity-preserving movement, not numeric subtraction followed by unrelated issuance.


Fault-Tolerant Budget Conservation in Agent Delegation
57
Symbol
Domain
Meaning
𝒦
finite set
authenticated resource dimensions
B𝑔
ℕ|𝒦|
vector issued by root grant 𝑔
𝑈𝑔
finite disjoint union
logical unit rights underlying B𝑔
𝑋𝑐, 𝑋𝑜, 𝑋𝑥
subsets of 𝑈𝑔
credit, operation, and transfer footprints
vec(𝑋)
ℕ|𝒦|
per-dimension cardinality of footprint 𝑋
𝜆
authorization-label domain
root, principal, purpose, audience, effect class, expiry, and policy
version
𝜆′ ⊑𝜆
partial order
child label is no broader than parent label
𝒢𝑇
DAG
task dependency graph; edges do not imply ownership
𝒢𝐶
DAG
credit lineage; edges represent consumed input and fresh output
𝑐, 𝑥, 𝑜
records
credit, sealed transfer, and operation
𝜖, 𝑟+, 𝜋¬𝑒
externally authenticated terminal
evidence
success receipt or fence-backed no-effect certificate
𝜔, 𝜁, 𝜋local
terminal-outcome witnesses
closed tagged sum of external evidence and a durable, authenticated
local never-dispatchable witness; 𝜁excludes success
𝜂
monotonic epoch
receiver-visible fencing epoch
𝜒𝑐
logical slot identifier
stable identifier of one reissue chain; split and join outputs receive
fresh slots
Current𝑠(𝑐, 𝜂)
state predicate
authority records 𝑐as the unique active generation for slot (𝑔, 𝜒𝑐) at
epoch 𝜂; disjoint sibling slots may be current concurrently, and
singleton input ownership is a separate guard
𝜅
receiver-scoped key
idempotency/query key for one normalized effect and source
generation; the separate acceptance digest binds the slot
𝛽𝑜
digest
complete gateway-acceptance binding from Equation (6), including
(𝑔, 𝜒𝑐)
ReturnTarget
predicate over 𝑜, 𝑐𝑟, 𝑠, 𝑠′
same-root, current in the committed successor state,
same-source-lineage, same-authority, label-non-widening destination
for unused rights
ReissueTarget
predicate over 𝑐, 𝜂, 𝜂+, 𝑐+, 𝑠, 𝑠′
authenticated same-root, same-authority, non-widening successor
generation
Avail, SafeA
atom sets
all raw available atoms of a generation, and the subset with retained
reclaim provenance; successor installation requires equality
TerminalRollover
abstract action
one atomic final terminal partition, predecessor closure, and
normalized same-slot successor installation
Φ𝑜
witness
joint current authorization, route, closure, effect, and credit evidence
u𝑜
ℕ|𝒦|
maximum amount reserved for operation 𝑜
d𝑟+
ℕ|𝒦|
authenticated actual charge in success receipt 𝑟+
𝜈sel
selector schema version
immutable public ordering used to derive an exact charged footprint
from a charge vector
A, T, R, Q, C, F
ℕ|𝒦|
available, transit, reserved, quarantined, committed, and forfeited
totals
Obs(𝑠)
effect-instance log
protected instances observed by the gateway in state 𝑠
𝜄
effect-instance record
distinct gateway occurrence with 𝑖𝑖𝑑, key, acceptance binding, digest,
receiver, and acceptance sequence
Covered(𝜄, 𝑜, 𝑠)
relation
instance 𝜄has one compatible charged operation 𝑜in state 𝑠
𝛼
abstraction function
concrete event to abstract transition or stutter
Table 12. Notation. Logical unit sets make aliasing explicit; the runtime may use compact balance and lineage
certificates.
C
Concrete-to-Abstract Refinement Obligations
A concrete implementation trace is a sequence of committed database transactions, gateway ob-
servations, and authenticated terminal evidence. Volatile steps that neither expose an effect nor
change durable state map to stutter. Tables 15 and 16 list the minimum simulation obligations.
D
Adversarial Trace Catalogue
D.1
Timeout Refund and Late Completion
Let 𝑈𝑔= {𝑢}. The safe prefix is:
A(𝑐)
Reserve(𝑜)
−−−−−−−−→R(𝑜)
Dispatch(𝑜)
−−−−−−−−−→Q(𝑜).


58
Zhu and Wang
Action
Precondition
Postcondition
Replay/failure behavior
Issue
authenticated fresh root; vector and
label schema valid
all 𝑈𝑔in one root A credit with a
fresh logical slot; install matching
epoch and active-generation
registers
duplicate root ID rejected or
returns identical issuance
Split
current owner generation/epoch;
pairwise-disjoint subsets; attenuated
labels
parent loses exactly union; install
every child under a pairwise-distinct
fresh logical slot; close and clear the
parent only if its complete
responsibility is consumed
same request stutters; conflicting
replay rejected
Delegate seal
current source; subset available;
destination/label bound
same atoms A →T; signed
certificate/outbox durable
send retries preserve transfer ID;
timeout stays T
Delegate decision
valid current certificate or
destination-exclusion proof;
decision pending
CAS to exactly one of accepted or
cancelled and logically moves the
footprint to the unique destination
child or back to the source;
acceptance installs the child under a
fresh logical slot with matching
current registers
duplicate returns prior decision;
competing terminal decision
rejected
Delegate
materialize
terminal transfer decision and
matching footprint
durable rows materialize the logical
owner already selected by the
decision register; abstract stutter
crash recovery repeats the same
materialization; stale source or
destination rows are never
authoritative
Reserve
current credit/epoch; available
footprint; valid effect and joint
witness
same atoms A →R; operation,
obligation, outbox, audit atomically
durable
duplicate identical operation
stutters; changed binding rejected
Dispatch
durable unexposed reservation;
outbox binding intact; current epoch
and witness rechecked
same atoms R →Q before possible
effect
duplicate gateway send observes
same key; crash remains Q
GatewayAccept
if key exists, stored binding must
equal 𝛽𝑜; if unseen, matching
durable dispatchable marker, 𝑋𝑜
wholly in Q/F, recomputed 𝛽𝑜, and
current epoch/witness for the
authenticated (𝑔, 𝜒𝑐) slot
existing exact binding stutters;
otherwise one per-key accepted 𝛽𝑜
is durable
exact replay remains readable after
terminal bucket moves;
unexposed, stale, or conflicting
first acceptance rejects
EffectOccurs
prior accepted binding; no instance
for key in the one-effect profile
append one fresh 𝜄to Obs
transport retry cannot append a
second instance
Table 13. Abstract action contract for issuance, transfer, reservation, dispatch, acceptance, and effect occur-
rence. Preconditions are part of the mechanism, not optional validation advice.
The controller sees no response. In execution 𝐻0, no gateway effect occurred; in 𝐻1, the effect
occurred and its response is delayed. The controller’s local view is identical. A timeout refund
would place 𝑢in A in both histories. Spending it under a fresh operation in 𝐻1 creates two covered
effect instances for one issued atom. The safe machine instead stutters until a query distinguishes
the histories, or moves the atom to F.
D.2
Duplicate Transfer Acceptance
The source seals 𝑋under 𝑥𝑖𝑑and retries after losing the acknowledgment. If the destination inter-
prets the certificate as a bearer balance, it can create 𝑐1 and 𝑐2, each with numeric value vec(𝑋). The
required uniqueness decision over (𝑔, 𝑥𝑖𝑑) returns the previously created 𝑐1; it does not re-import
the ranges. Source cancellation is equally dangerous unless the destination has durably fenced 𝑥𝑖𝑑.
D.3
Aliased Diamond Join
A parent credit is referenced by task branches 𝑎and 𝑏, but only one actual transfer occurs. Both
task results point to the same descendant credit 𝑐. A naive join computes a𝑐+ a𝑐. The set model
instead tests 𝑋𝑐∩𝑋𝑐= 𝑋𝑐≠∅and rejects. Task multiplicity does not create credit multiplicity.


Fault-Tolerant Budget Conservation in Agent Delegation
59
Action
Precondition
Postcondition
Replay/failure behavior
Settle success
full footprint in Q(𝑜); valid receipt
for 𝜄∈Obs, matching 𝛽𝑜; when the
remainder is nonempty, a
decision-bound return credit
satisfying Equation (7); 0 ⪯d ⪯u
version-bound Take𝜈sel(𝑋𝑜, d)
Q →C; complement Q →A; bind
𝐻(𝐷𝑜) and 𝐻(𝑋𝑜∖𝐷𝑜)
identical receipt stutters;
conflicting receipt or partition
rejects
Return
type-matched 𝜁: local no-dispatch
precondition for 𝜋local, or gateway
fence plus authoritative 𝜋¬𝑒proof
that the exact binding was never
accepted and cannot occur; return
target satisfies Equation (7)
all operation atoms move from the
branch-specific R/Q →A; write
terminal decision and audit; the
local branch also persists 𝜋local and
sets the dispatch gate to absorbing
local-abort
timeout or local lease expiry alone
has no transition
Retire
unresolved quarantined operation
and authorized administrative
decision
all operation atoms Q →F
availability never increases; F is
absorbing
Fence
source is current; authenticated
target 𝜂+ >
AuthoritativeEpoch(𝑔, 𝜒𝑐) = 𝜂𝑐;
gateway installation protocol
satisfied
install the gateway fence, mark the
old credit closing, clear its active
generation, and advance the slot
authority epoch without moving
balance or creating a successor; old
generation cannot initiate a new
effect and recorded old outcomes
remain queryable
old messages reject or return prior
result
Reissue
old generation closed at installed 𝜂+;
exact Reusable footprint uniquely
available; SafeA = Avail; write-once
key selects (𝜂+, 𝑐+) for normalized
predecessor (𝑔, 𝜒𝑐, 𝑐𝑖𝑑, 𝜂𝑐); target
satisfies Equation (16)
one transaction moves only that
footprint and installs 𝑐+ as current
for the same logical slot
committed, forfeited, accepted, or
unresolved atoms never move;
exact replay stutters and changed
target rejects
TerminalRollover
fenced predecessor is closing; 𝑜is its
final nonterminal operation with a
type-matched terminal-outcome
witness; source and settlement
authority agree; SafeA = Avail; both
decision keys are unassigned;
normalized reissue target satisfies
Equations (17)–(18)
one transaction fixes the terminal
partition, moves only its return
footprint plus disjoint SafeA to 𝑐+,
closes 𝑐, and installs 𝑐+, writes both
keys, sets the witness-specific
operation/outbox outcome, and
appends its audit node; the local
branch additionally sets the
absorbing local-abort dispatch
gate
exact replay stutters; changed
evidence, partition, epoch, or
successor rejects
Join
current, operation-free,
pairwise-disjoint same-root inputs
controlled by one transition
authority
inputs consumed; same-root output
owns their exact union under
lower-bound label and a fresh
logical slot; fully consumed inputs
close and clear, and the output’s
current registers are installed
duplicate stutters; overlap or
mixed root rejects
Table 14. Abstract action contract for settlement, return, retirement, fencing, reissue, fused rollover, and join
(continued).
D.4
Stale Epoch After Reclaim
Worker 𝑤holds generation 𝜂, partitions, and prepares operation 𝑜. The controller first installs the
gateway fence and advances the authority epoch to some 𝜂+ > 𝜂. That step neither rewrites the
old credit’s epoch, moves its balance, nor creates a successor. Reallocation occurs later and only
after Closed and exact Reusable hold: each exposed obligation has complete terminal settlement
or authoritative, fence-backed proof that its exact binding was never accepted and never occurred.
When 𝑤reconnects, the gateway rejects a new key under 𝜂. If 𝑜’s key was already recorded before
the fence, the gateway returns that outcome for settlement; it does not execute a second effect. An
epoch checked only in the controller database cannot provide this property.


60
Zhu and Wang
Concrete event
Abstract image
Required evidence
Forbidden mapping
Root row commit
Issue
issuer signature, fresh
generation, exact vector
editing an existing issued
vector
Source debit + transfer
row commit
Delegate seal
one transaction, same
compressed ranges
message send before
source debit
Transfer-decision CAS
AcceptTransfer or
CancelTransfer, including the one
logical ownership switch
valid certificate/exclusion
proof and monotone
decision register
accepted and cancelled
both becoming terminal
Destination/source
finalization
stutter (materialization only)
same terminal decision
and exact compressed
ranges; logical ownership
is read from the decision
register
treating a stale row as
authoritative or moving
the abstract footprint a
second time
Operation/outbox
commit
Reserve
atomic debit and
immutable slot/effect
binding
reserving after tool
execution
Dispatchable marker
commit
Dispatch
durable R →Q before
gateway exposure
network send while still
only R
Gateway acceptance
row
GatewayAccept
existing exact binding, or,
for first acceptance only,
matching durable
dispatchable marker and
Q/F ownership,
authenticated logical slot,
its current epoch/fence,
recomputed 𝛽𝑜, witness,
and maximum vector
reapplying
first-acceptance bucket
guards to an exact
terminal replay, or
accepting an unexposed,
stale, or changed binding
Gateway effect log
EffectOccurs
prior accepted binding,
fresh 𝑖𝑖𝑑, complete
maximum-charge contract
an unbound direct
receiver call or a second
instance for one key
Table 15. Refinement obligations for issuance, transfer, dispatch, and gateway effects.
D.5
Partial Charge and Duplicate Receipt
Operation 𝑜reserves vector (1000 cents, 3 calls). A receipt authenticates (730, 1). One transaction
commits a matching subset and returns (270, 2). Replaying the receipt returns the same terminal
decision. A second receipt claiming (820, 1) is not a second partial update; it conflicts with the
immutable terminal decision and is quarantined for investigation.
E
Claim–Evidence Matrix
F
Artifact and Reproduction Protocol
F.1
Directory Contract
formal/
BudgetConservation.tla
DelegationLineage.tla
budget_model.mjs
bounded_model.mjs
configs/
safe.cfg
timeout_refund_mutant.cfg
lineage_safe.cfg


Fault-Tolerant Budget Conservation in Agent Delegation
61
Concrete event
Abstract image
Required evidence
Forbidden mapping
Terminal-outcome
transaction
Settle, Return, or, when fused
with successor installation,
TerminalRollover
a tagged external
signature or trusted
durable local no-dispatch
witness, 𝛽𝑜including
selector version, one
terminal CAS, exact
committed/remainder
footprint commitments,
and Equation (7) for every
returned atom
treating a success receipt
as no-effect evidence,
choosing a noncanonical
partition, applying a
textual worker assertion,
or widening/redirecting a
remainder
Timeout / worker death
stutter + reconciliation request
no ownership change
Q →A
Epoch installation
Fence
monotone successor
visible at every protected
gateway
local-only epoch bump
followed by reuse
Ordinary
successor-generation
transaction
Reissue
closed-generation proof at
the installed 𝜂+, exact
uniquely available
reusable footprint,
write-once unique reissue
decision, and
authenticated target
satisfying Equation (16);
decision, current
metadata, and move are
atomic
copying old C/F/T/Q
atoms or
widening/changing the
successor lineage, root, or
authority
Fused
final-outcome/successor
transaction
TerminalRollover
Equations (17)–(18);
canonical terminal
partition and status;
complete SafeA; atomic
terminal and normalized
reissue decisions
mapping the fused
commit to only Settle,
Return, or Reissue, or
copying an input atom
Audit-only append
stutter
digest of an already
authoritative decision
moving rights solely
because a log entry exists
Table 16. Refinement obligations for terminal resolution, fencing, and successor installation. A trace that
cannot be mapped without violating Tables 15–16 is outside the implementation theorem.
lineage_current_join_witness.cfg
lineage_historical_certificate_validation_mutant.cfg
bench/
run_tlc_model_checks.mjs
run_lineage_tlc.mjs
fault_injection_eval.mjs
sqlite_process_service.mjs
sqlite_multiprocess_eval.mjs
sqlite_trace_checker.mjs
run_all.mjs
aggregate_results.mjs
verify_artifact.mjs
results_tla_model_check.json
results_lineage_tla_model_check.json
results_bounded_model.json


62
Zhu and Wang
Claim
Analytical support
Executable support
Explicit exclusion
Ownership partition
transition induction over raw
ownership relations
lineage tagged-occurrence
model, legal-join witness, and
compound invalid fan-in
mutant; settlement model
separately checks the
single-location obligations
Byzantine/corrupt
authoritative store
Exact six-bucket conservation
partition lemma + vector corollary
finite transition-accounting
checks and runtime prefix
checks
real-world value not
represented by resource
schema
Descendant non-amplification
cut/lineage induction
split, transfer, join, and alias
schedules
task quality and fair allocation
At-most-once settlement
immutable binding + terminal
CAS
duplicate and conflicting
receipt cases
exactly-once network delivery
Effect-instance coverage and
external exposure bound
injective gateway binding +
complete-charge theorem
effect-instance log joined to
operation and maximum-vector
trace
unmediated paths or dishonest
charge authority
Late-completion safety
Q retention + fence argument
effect-before-response-loss and
delayed receipt cases
automatic eventual refund
Partition confinement
exclusive preallocation theorem
exclusive-transfer and
coordinator-outage schedules
in bounded models; the
theorem is the primary support
full availability after local
escrow exhaustion
Concrete trace lifting
conditional criterion under
Appendix C
independent checks of selected
binding and prefix obligations
plus invalid-trace cases
a universal refinement proof
for unexamined handlers or
deployments
Prototype timing
characterization
no theorem
local durable-store diagnostic
timings
Internet-scale or production
SLO
Table 17. Claims are linked to distinct analytical and executable evidence. The exclusions are part of the
claim, not deferred implementation details.
results_fault_injection.json
results_aggregate.json
artifact-manifest.json
sqlite_runtime_results/<run>/
summary.json
checker-summary.json
traces/
db/
generated-results.tex
The two TLA+ files are complementary: one covers settlement, acceptance, effects, fencing, and
generations; the other covers lineage and fan-in. The JavaScript model is a second executable en-
coding of the settlement abstraction, not an independent conceptual specification. Concrete SQLite
results retain one branch-ledger and one gateway database per case. The compact branch persists a
signed dispatch permit in its 𝑊3 transaction; the gateway verifies and records the permit before ac-
cepting an unseen key. Its independent checker separately validates the signature, temporal order,
and cross-store binding. This exercises the evaluated first-acceptance guard without substituting
finite traces for universal adapter or end-to-end refinement. results_aggregate.json is the sole
numeric source for generated-results.tex; generated output is never treated as a source model.
F.2
Canonical Commands
# Verify retained TLC/SQLite evidence and rerun JS layers:
node bench/run_all.mjs --skip-tlc
# Rerun both pinned TLC models:


Fault-Tolerant Budget Conservation in Agent Delegation
63
TLA2TOOLS_JAR=/absolute/path/tla2tools.jar \
JAVA_BIN=/absolute/path/java \
node bench/run_all.mjs
# Also create a fresh, non-overwriting SQLite run:
TLA2TOOLS_JAR=/absolute/path/tla2tools.jar \
JAVA_BIN=/absolute/path/java \
node bench/run_all.mjs --rerun-sqlite
# Regenerate/verify from the retained concrete run:
node bench/aggregate_results.mjs \
--sqlite-dir \
bench/sqlite_runtime_results/dispatch-permit-v1-20260925
node bench/verify_artifact.mjs
tectonic -X compile main.tex --outdir build \
--keep-logs --keep-intermediates --only-cached
The --rerun-sqlite mode always allocates a new timestamped directory; it neither removes
nor overwrites a retained run. The verification command fails if a source or result digest is stale, a
required safe or mutant case is absent, a safe-profile invariant count is nonzero, the aggregate and
generated LaTeX differ, a JSONL record count changes, or any of the 22 retained SQLite databases
fails PRAGMA integrity_check. It also re-executes the independent SQLite snapshot checker, the
dependency-free finite explorer, and the schedule suite, compares their outputs byte-for-byte, and
directly checks persisted terminal return targets, successor lifecycle rows, and transaction guards.
F.3
Environment Disclosure
The artifact manifest records operating system, architecture, CPU, memory, Node.js, Java and TLC
versions, the pinned TLC JAR digest, and SHA-256 plus byte length for every retained source and
result. The concrete SQLite evidence additionally records SQLite version, process topology, com-
mand, UTC start/completion times, and source hashes. TLC uses one worker, a fixed fingerprint
polynomial, and a fixed seed where applicable; the named JavaScript and SQLite schedules are
deterministic. The provider-free artifact requires no network access after the pinned TLC JAR is
available.
F.4
Result Reporting
For each model:
• report constants, distinct and generated states, search depth or graph depth, queue/completion
status, and invariant result;
• retain the shortest available counterexample for every mutant;
• identify whether symmetry, state constraints, or liveness checking was used; and
• never translate “no error in scope” into “proved for all sizes.”
For each concrete case, the artifact retains the full JSONL event trace, durable branch/gateway
snapshots, effect/terminal-evidence binding, expected outcome, actual outcome, and independent
pass/fail decision. It also retains per-case RPC and restart summaries from the same correctness
runs so every reported descriptive timing can be regenerated. These timing samples are health
checks, not a throughput experiment or production SLO.


64
Zhu and Wang
G
Deployment Assurance Checklist
(1) Define every resource dimension, unit, rounding rule, maximum-charge rule, and authoritative
settlement source.
(2) Enumerate every route to each protected effect; remove direct credentials or mark the deploy-
ment outside complete mediation.
(3) Verify that reserve, obligation, outbox, and audit records share one durable local transaction.
(4) Verify that possible gateway exposure occurs only after the durable R →Q transition.
(5) At first acceptance, require a signed single-use dispatch permit or an authoritative branch query
proving the matching dispatchable marker and Q/F ownership; an offline audit is insufficient.
(6) Scope operation keys to receiver and normalized effect; make exact replay a stable decision
and conflicting replay an error.
(7) Recompute 𝛽𝑜and test terminal-evidence signatures and every immutable binding, including
root, logical slot, lineage, footprint, epoch, effect, receiver, maximum, and actual charge.
(8) Require Equation (7) for every partial remainder or no-effect return; use a separate sealed
transfer for cross-store or ancestor return.
(9) Before reusing a lost generation, install fences at every protected gateway and obtain terminal
settlement or authoritative proof that each returned binding was never accepted and never
occurred; a fence or lease expiry alone is not effect-absence evidence.
(10) Reject numeric fan-in unless ownership inputs are pairwise disjoint and atomically consumed.
(11) Monitor T, Q, F separately from committed spend and available capacity.
(12) Bound per-child reservations and define escalation, reconciliation, and forfeiture authorities.
(13) Run the conformance suite for each MCP, A2A, HTTP, browser, shell, or framework adapter.
(14) Publish the actual endpoint capability profile and preserve the assumptions beside every assur-
ance claim.
H
Proof and Evidence Dependency Map
The logical dependency chain is:
authenticated exclusive issuance
⇓
ownership-preserving transitions ⇒partition lemma ⇒exact vector conservation
⇓
disjoint lineage ⇒descendant non-amplification
⇓
reserve before exposure + immutable operation binding
⇓
settlement uniqueness + injective effect-instance coverage
⇓
complete charge or conservative maximum ⇒external exposure bound
⇓
gateway-visible epoch fence ⇒late-completion safety
⇓
handler-level trace-lifting obligations ⇒conditional runtime result.
Formal exploration targets the first five arrows. Concrete trace checking targets the final re-
finement arrow. Fault injection demonstrates that the runtime reaches the declared recovery cuts.
None substitutes for verifying the environmental assumptions named above.


Fault-Tolerant Budget Conservation in Agent Delegation
65
References
[1] A2A Project. 2026. Agent2Agent (A2A) Protocol Specification, Version 1.0.0.
https://a2a-protocol.org/v1.0.
0/specification/ Protocol specification, accessed 25 September 2026.
[2] Natasha Alechina, Brian Logan, Hoang Nga Nguyen, and Abdur Rakib. 2010. Resource-Bounded Alternating-Time
Temporal Logic. In Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems.
481–488.
[3] Andreas Andreakis. 2026. Machine-Checked Dual-Write Recovery from a Commit Log.
https://doi.org/10.
48550/arXiv.2608.00501 arXiv:2608.00501 [cs.DB]
[4] Peter Bailis, Alan Fekete, Michael J. Franklin, Ali Ghodsi, Joseph M. Hellerstein, and Ion Stoica. 2014. Coordination
Avoidance in Database Systems. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment 8, 3 (2014), 185–196. https://doi.org/10.
14778/2735508.2735509
[5] Valter Balegas, Diogo Serra, Sérgio Duarte, Carla Ferreira, Marc Shapiro, Rodrigo Rodrigues, and Nuno Preguiça. 2015.
Extending Eventually Consistent Cloud Databases for Enforcing Numeric Invariants. In 2015 IEEE 34th Symposium
on Reliable Distributed Systems (SRDS). IEEE, 31–36. https://doi.org/10.1109/SRDS.2015.32
[6] Amrish Baskaran, Nirbhay Pherwani, and Raghul Krishnan. 2026. Aegon: Auditable AI Content Access with Ledger-
Bound Tokens and Hardware-Attested Mobile Receipts.
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2604.06693
arXiv:2604.06693 [cs.CR]
[7] Andrew D. Birrell and Bruce Jay Nelson. 1984. Implementing Remote Procedure Calls. ACM Transactions on Computer
Systems 2, 1 (Feb. 1984), 39–59. https://doi.org/10.1145/2080.357392
[8] Mike Burrows. 2006.
The Chubby Lock Service for Loosely-Coupled Distributed Systems. In Proceedings of the
7th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation. 335–350.
https://www.usenix.org/
conference/osdi-06/chubby-lock-service-loosely-coupled-distributed-systems
[9] Leo Cao, Luoxi Meng, Deian Stefan, and Earlence Fernandes. 2024. Stateful Least Privilege Authorization for the
Cloud. In 33rd USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 24). USENIX Association, Philadelphia, PA, 3477–3494.
https://www.usenix.org/conference/usenixsecurity24/presentation/cao-leo
[10] Asiri Dalugoda. 2026. HDP: A Lightweight Cryptographic Protocol for Human Delegation Provenance in Agentic AI
Systems. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2604.04522 arXiv:2604.04522 [cs.CR]
[11] Michael J. Fischer, Nancy A. Lynch, and Michael S. Paterson. 1985. Impossibility of Distributed Consensus with One
Faulty Process. J. ACM 32, 2 (1985), 374–382. https://doi.org/10.1145/3149.214121
[12] Hector Garcia-Molina and Kenneth Salem. 1987. Sagas. In Proceedings of the 1987 ACM SIGMOD International Confer-
ence on Management of Data. 249–259. https://doi.org/10.1145/38713.38742
[13] Seth Gilbert and Nancy Lynch. 2002. Brewer’s Conjecture and the Feasibility of Consistent, Available, Partition-
Tolerant Web Services. ACM SIGACT News 33, 2 (2002), 51–59. https://doi.org/10.1145/564585.564601
[14] Cary G. Gray and David R. Cheriton. 1989. Leases: An Efficient Fault-Tolerant Mechanism for Distributed File Cache
Consistency. In Proceedings of the Twelfth ACM Symposium on Operating Systems Principles. 202–210. https://doi.
org/10.1145/74850.74870
[15] Pat Helland. 2017. Life Beyond Distributed Transactions: An Apostate’s Opinion. Commun. ACM 60, 2 (2017), 46–54.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3009826
[16] Joseph M. Hellerstein. 2026. Complete CALM: A Coordination Criterion for Specifications.
https://doi.org/10.
48550/arXiv.2602.09435 arXiv:2602.09435 [cs.DC]
[17] Maurice P. Herlihy and Jeannette M. Wing. 1990. Linearizability: A Correctness Condition for Concurrent Objects.
ACM Transactions on Programming Languages and Systems 12, 3 (1990), 463–492. https://doi.org/10.1145/78969.
78972
[18] Amjad Ibrahim and Yong Li. 2026. Overlaying Governance: A Compositional Authorization Framework for Delegation
and Scope in Agentic AI. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2606.03518 arXiv:2606.03518 [cs.AI]
[19] Jin Jia, Zhiling Deng, Zhuangbin Chen, Yingqi Wang, and Zibin Zheng. 2026. MAS-FIRE: Fault Injection and Re-
liability Evaluation for LLM-Based Multi-Agent Systems.
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2602.19843
arXiv:2602.19843 [cs.MA]
[20] Michael B. Jones, Anthony Nadalin, Brian Campbell, John Bradley, and Chuck Mortimore. 2020. OAuth 2.0 Token
Exchange. Technical Report RFC 8693. Internet Engineering Task Force. https://doi.org/10.17487/RFC8693
[21] Anuj Kaul, Qianlong Lan, and Pranay Gupta. 2026. Behavioral Governance for Autonomous AI Agents: The Agent-
Bound Framework. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2606.30970 arXiv:2606.30970 [cs.AI]
[22] Sajjad Khan. 2026. Token Budgets: An Empirical Catalog of 63 LLM-Agent Budget-Overrun Incidents, with an Affine-
Typed Rust Mitigation as a Case Study. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2606.04056 arXiv:2606.04056 [cs.SE]
[23] Narayanan Krishnakumar and Ravi Jain. 1997. Escrow Techniques for Mobile Sales and Inventory Applications.
Wireless Networks 3 (1997), 235–246. https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1019161318592


66
Zhu and Wang
[24] Leslie Lamport. 1978. Time, Clocks, and the Ordering of Events in a Distributed System. Commun. ACM 21, 7 (1978),
558–565. https://doi.org/10.1145/359545.359563
[25] Leslie Lamport. 2002. Specifying Systems: The TLA+ Language and Tools for Hardware and Software Engineers. Addison-
Wesley.
[26] Matthew D. Laws, Alina Oprea, and Cristina Nita-Rotaru. 2026.
Attacks and Mitigations for Distributed Gov-
ernance of Agentic AI under Byzantine Adversaries.
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2605.12364
arXiv:2605.12364 [cs.CR]
[27] Collin Lee, Seo Jin Park, Ankita Kejriwal, Satoshi Matsushita, and John Ousterhout. 2015. Implementing Linearizabil-
ity at Large Scale and Low Latency. In Proceedings of the 25th Symposium on Operating Systems Principles (SOSP ’15).
Association for Computing Machinery, 71–86. https://doi.org/10.1145/2815400.2815416
[28] Jiapeng Li. 2026. Where Does Exactly-Once Live? Model, Harness, and Tool-Contract Effects on Duplicate Side Effects
in LLM Agents. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2609.29095 arXiv:2609.29095 [cs.LG]
[29] Torsten Lodderstedt, Justin Richer, and Brian Campbell. 2023. OAuth 2.0 Rich Authorization Requests. Technical Report
RFC 9396. Internet Engineering Task Force. https://doi.org/10.17487/RFC9396
[30] Model Context Protocol. 2026. Authorization.
https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/2026-07-
28/basic/authorization Protocol specification, version 2026-07-28; accessed 25 September 2026.
[31] Bardia Mohammadi, Nearchos Potamitis, Lars Klein, Akhil Arora, and Laurent Bindschaedler. 2026. Atomix: Timely,
Transactional Tool Use for Reliable Agentic Workflows.
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2602.14849
arXiv:2602.14849 [cs.LG]
[32] Niki Aimable Niyikiza. 2026. Attenuating Authorization Tokens for Agentic Delegation Chains. Internet-Draft draft-
niyikiza-oauth-attenuating-agent-tokens-01. Internet Engineering Task Force. https://datatracker.ietf.org/
doc/draft-niyikiza-oauth-attenuating-agent-tokens/01/ Work in Progress.
[33] Patrick E. O’Neil. 1986. The Escrow Transactional Method. ACM Transactions on Database Systems 11, 4 (1986),
405–430. https://doi.org/10.1145/7239.7265
[34] Diego Ongaro and John Ousterhout. 2014. In Search of an Understandable Consensus Algorithm. In 2014 USENIX
Annual Technical Conference. 305–319.
https://www.usenix.org/conference/atc14/technical-sessions/
presentation/ongaro
[35] Vladyslav Parakhin. 2026.
The Bureaucracy of Speed: Structural Equivalence Between Memory Consistency
Models and Multi-Agent Authorization Revocation.
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2603.09875
arXiv:2603.09875 [cs.MA]
[36] Sunil Prakash. 2026. AIP: Agent Identity Protocol for Verifiable Delegation Across MCP and A2A.
https://doi.
org/10.48550/arXiv.2603.24775 arXiv:2603.24775 [cs.CR]
[37] Kaiyang Qian, Xinmin Fang, and Zhengxiong Li. 2026.
MPAC: A Multi-Principal Agent Coordination Pro-
tocol for Interoperable Multi-Agent Collaboration.
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2604.09744
arXiv:2604.09744 [cs.MA]
[38] Ashay Raut. 2026. Transaction Tokens for Agents. Internet-Draft draft-araut-oauth-transaction-tokens-for-agents-02.
Internet Engineering Task Force.
https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-araut-oauth-transaction-
tokens-for-agents/02/ Active individual Internet-Draft; Work in Progress.
[39] Jerome H. Saltzer and Michael D. Schroeder. 1975. The Protection of Information in Computer Systems. Proc. IEEE
63, 9 (1975), 1278–1308. https://doi.org/10.1109/PROC.1975.9939
[40] Igor Santos-Grueiro. 2026. Context-to-Execution Integrity for LLM Agents.
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.
2607.06000 arXiv:2607.06000 [cs.CR]
[41] Igor Santos-Grueiro. 2026. Temporary Authority, Permanent Effects: Commit-Time Authorization for LLM Agents.
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2607.10487 arXiv:2607.10487 [cs.CR]
[42] Marc Shapiro, Annette Bieniusa, Nuno Preguiça, Valter Balegas, and Christopher Meiklejohn. 2018.
Just-Right
Consistency: Reconciling Availability and Safety.
Data Science and Engineering 3, 4 (2018), 358–368.
https:
//doi.org/10.1007/s41019-018-0080-z
[43] Marc Shapiro, Nuno Preguiça, Carlos Baquero, and Marek Zawirski. 2011. Conflict-Free Replicated Data Types. In
Stabilization, Safety, and Security of Distributed Systems (Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 6976). 386–400. https:
//doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-24550-3_29
[44] Reshabh K. Sharma, Linxi Jiang, Zhiqiang Lin, and Shuo Chen. 2026. PAuth: Precise Task-Scoped Authorization for
Agents. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2603.17170 arXiv:2603.17170 [cs.CR]
[45] Artem Trofimov, Igor E. Kuralenok, Nikita Marshalkin, and Boris Novikov. 2019. Delivery, Consistency, and De-
terminism: Rethinking Guarantees in Distributed Stream Processing.
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1907.
06250 arXiv:1907.06250 [cs.DB]
[46] Huacan Wang, Chaofa Yuan, Xialie Zhuang, Tu Hu, Shuo Zhang, Jun Han, Shi Wei, Daiqiang Li, Jingping Liu, Kunyi
Wang, Zihan Yin, Zhenheng Tang, Andy Wang, Henry Peng Zou, Philip S. Yu, Sen Hu, Qizhen Lan, and Ronghao


Fault-Tolerant Budget Conservation in Agent Delegation
67
Chen. 2026. EpochX: Building the Infrastructure for an Emergent Agent Civilization. https://doi.org/10.48550/
arXiv.2603.27304 arXiv:2603.27304 [cs.AI]
[47] Jinghan Xu, Longze Fan, Zeyuan Wang, Xinjin Li, and Hankai Liu. 2026. Beyond Single-Use Tokens: Durable Au-
thorization State for Replay-Resistant LLM Agent Actions.
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2608.01710
arXiv:2608.01710 [cs.AI]
[48] Qing Ye and Jing Tan. 2026. Agent Contracts: A Formal Framework for Resource-Bounded Autonomous AI Sys-
tems.
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2601.08815 arXiv:2601.08815 [cs.MA] Accepted for oral presentation
at COINE 2026, co-located with AAMAS 2026.
[49] Haoran Zhang, Adney Cardoza, Peter Baile Chen, Sebastian Angel, and Vincent Liu. 2020. Fault-Tolerant and Trans-
actional Stateful Serverless Workflows. In 14th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementa-
tion (OSDI 20). USENIX Association, 1187–1204. https://www.usenix.org/conference/osdi20/presentation/
zhang-haoran
[50] Genliang Zhu and Chu Wang. 2026. Explanation-Bound Tool Execution for AI Agents: Server-Verified Action Claims
Without Trusting Model Rationales. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2607.25364 arXiv:2607.25364 [cs.AI]
[51] Genliang Zhu and Chu Wang. 2026. Intent-Governed Tool Authorization for AI Agents.
https://doi.org/10.
48550/arXiv.2606.22916 arXiv:2606.22916 [cs.AI]
[52] Genliang Zhu and Chu Wang. 2026.
Versioned Transitive Dependency-Closure Binding and Operation-Time
Effect Governance for Agent Skills: ClosureBound.
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2609.05920
arXiv:2609.05920 [cs.CR]
[53] Genliang Zhu, Chu Wang, Ziyuan Wang, Zhida Li, and Qiang Li. 2026. OpenPort Protocol: A Security Governance
Specification for AI Agent Tool Access. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2602.20196 arXiv:2602.20196 [cs.CR]
[54] Siyuan Zhuang, Stephanie Wang, Eric Liang, Yi Cheng, and Ion Stoica. 2023. ExoFlow: A Universal Workflow Sys-
tem for Exactly-Once DAGs. In 17th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI
23). USENIX Association, Boston, MA, 269–286. https://www.usenix.org/conference/osdi23/presentation/
zhuang
