Title: Robustness and Leadership in Markov-switching Consensus Networks

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.25888v1

Published Time: Thu, 25 Jun 2026 01:15:14 GMT

Number of Pages: 19

Markdown Content:
# Robustness and Leadership in Markov-switching Consensus Networks ∗† 

## Sarah H. Cen, Vaibhav Srivastava, and Naomi Ehrich Leonard ‡

Abstract 

We investigate how time-varying interactions, modeled via a Markov switching graph (MSG), impact the robustness of noisy multi-agent dynamics in both continuous- and discrete-time settings. Our focus is on the steady-state performance of consensus and leader-follower tracking dynamics subject to stochastic noise. Using the framework of Markov jump linear systems (MJLS), we derive expressions for the steady-state covariance of each agent’s deviation from consensus and tracking error, respectively, and use them to quantify individual and group performance as a function of the interaction graphs and the switching dynamics. We extend established notions of robustness, certainty indices, and joint centrality from static graphs to the MSG setting. To gain analytical insight, we specialize our results to systems switching between two topologies and characterize how switching influences performance. Numerical simulations further illustrate how switching topologies affects system robustness in both coordination tasks. 

# 1 Introduction 

Many systems rely on the coordinated behavior of multiple agents, each performing individual tasks while interacting strategically to achieve a common objective. Such multi-agent systems appear across a wide range of domains, including biology, engineering, and economics. These systems often operate in environments characterized by stochastic disturbances and time-varying patterns of interaction. Designing effective multi-agent systems thus requires a careful understanding of how temporal variations in connectivity and the presence of noise influence both individual and collective performance. In this paper, we examine the influence of time-varying interaction among agents on the robustness of consensus dynamics [2, 3] and the related leader-follower collective tracking problem, in the presence of stochastic noise. We model the time-varying interaction by a Markov switching graph (MSG), defined by a set of static graphs and a Markov chain that describes the transitions among these graphs. The robustness of the consensus problem has been extensively studied for static interaction graphs among agents [4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9]. Extending these results to time-varying graphs is challenging due to the limited analytic tractability of time-dependent dynamical systems. Consensus dynamics have been analyzed for deterministically time-varying graphs [10] and for stochastically time-varying graphs [11, 12, 13], but these works do not address the impact of stochastic noise. In particular, tools such as contraction analysis cannot be readily applied in the presence of stochastic disturbances. We address this gap by leveraging the structure of MSGs, a tractable subclass of stochastically time-varying graphs, to characterize the robustness properties of consensus dynamics under noise. While con-sensus over MSGs has been previously studied in [11], the role of noise in shaping performance within such frameworks has, to the best of our knowledge, not been examined. 

> ∗

This is an extended version of the conference paper [1]. Beyond the results reported therein, this extended version incorpo-rates an analysis of the discrete-time setting and derives analytical specializations of the general results for the case of switching between two graph topologies. 

> †

This research has been supported by ONR grant N00014-14-1-0635 and ARO grant W911NF-14-1-0431. 

> ‡

S. H. Cen is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA (sarahcen@andrew.cmu.edu). V. Srivastava is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI 48824, USA (vaibhav@egr.msu.edu). N. E. Leonard is with the Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544, USA (naomi@princeton.edu). 

1

> arXiv:2606.25888v1 [eess.SY] 24 Jun 2026

The noisy leader-follower collective tracking problem involves a network of agents that must track an external reference signal despite the presence of measurement and communication noise. A subset of agents, called leaders, directly observe the reference signal, while the remaining followers rely solely on information exchanged through the network. This problem has been studied primarily in the context of optimal leader selection, where the goal is to choose a leader set that optimizes collective tracking performance [14, 15, 16, 17], as well as in the context of edge modifications [18]. Prior work has addressed leader selection for time-varying graphs that evolve much more slowly than the consensus dynamics, or for stochastic time-varying graphs subject to random link failures [17]. In contrast, we study the noisy leader-follower tracking problem under MSGs, where graph switching may occur at comparable or faster timescales. Our framework does not require any time-scale separation between graph and state dynamics and accommodates a broader class of stochastic interaction models than those considered in [17]. Similar problems have been studied in the context of sensor selection [19]. Our results leverage the theory of Markov jump linear systems (MJLS) [20, 21] to characterize robustness and leadership properties in time-varying multi-agent networks. Our main contributions are fourfold. First, we derive measures of steady-state performance for noisy consensus and leader-follower tracking dynamics under MSGs, in both continuous- and discrete-time settings. These measures quantify system and node-level deviations from ideal behavior, due to noise, as a function of the network topologies and the switching process. Second, we show how these measures can be used to extend existing notions of robustness, certainty, and centrality measures for static graphs to MSGs. Third, we specialize our general results to the case of switching between two network topologies. This analysis allows us to characterize how switching topologies influences performance relative to a randomly assigned static topology. Fourth, we numerically illustrate how system performance can be different and sometimes better for the dynamic graph as compared to the static graph. The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we introduce the noisy consensus and leader-follower tracking problems under Markov switching graphs (MSGs), define the performance metrics of interest, and review relevant background on continuous-time Markov jump linear systems (MJLS), which form the foundation of our analysis. In Section 3, we derive steady-state performance expressions for both coordination problems. Section 4 introduces robustness, certainty, and centrality indices for MSGs. To gain additional analytic insights, we specialize to the case of switching between two graph topologies in Section 5. Section 6 presents numerical examples that illustrate the influence of switching dynamics on system performance. We conclude in Section 7. Extension of the results to a discrete-time setting is presented in Appendix I. 

## 1.1 Notation 

In this paper, matrices are denoted by upper-case letters and vectors by lower-case letters in bold. The i-th element of vector x is denoted by xi, and the pi, j q-th entry of a matrix A is denoted Aij . The transpose, inverse, and pseudoinverse of a matrix A are written as AJ, A´1, and A`, respectively. The vectors 0n and 

1n denote n ˆ 1 vectors of all zeros and ones, respectively. The n ˆ n identity matrix is In and the n ˆ n

exchange matrix is Jn.The matrix A b B P Rmp ˆnq denotes the Kronecker product of matrices A P Rmˆn and B P Rpˆq . The matrix A ‘ B “ p A b In ` Im b Bq P Rmn ˆmn denotes the Kronecker sum of matrices A P Rmˆm and 

B P Rnˆn. The covariance, trace, and vectorization of a matrix A are denoted by cov pAq, tr pAq, and vec pAq,respectively. Additionally, diag npAiq is the block-diagonal matrix with entries pA1, A 2, . . . , A nq.The indicator function is denoted 1pEq, and the probability of an event E is denoted Pr pEq. The pn ´ 1q-dimensional probability simplex in Rn is denoted ∆ n, and the expectation of a random variable X is written as EpXq.22 Two noisy distributed coordination problems under Markov switching graphs 

In this section, we review the noisy consensus and noisy leader-follower reference tracking coordination problems for time-varying networks. We present our definitions of system and node errors as measures of performance. Finally, we introduce MSG and MJLS. 

## 2.1 Problem Statement 

Consider a network of m agents with system state xptq P Rm, where xiptq is the state of agent i at time t ě 0. At time t, each agent i sends and receives information from its set of neighbors Niptq. The resulting commu-nication topologies are represented by the undirected, unweighted time-varying graph Gptq “ p V, Eptq, Y ptqq 

for the set of nodes V “ t 1, . . . , m u, set of edges Eptq Ď V ˆ V, and adjacency matrix Y ptq P Rmˆm. Each graph node corresponds to an agent in the network, and an edge pi, j q between nodes i and j exists at time 

t when j P Niptq. Yij ptq “ 1 if edge pi, j q exists at time t; otherwise, Yij ptq “ 0. Since Gptq is undirected, 

pi, j q implies pj, i q, and Y ptq is thus symmetric. The degree of node i at time t is diptq “ řmj“1 Yij ptq,and the degree matrix Dptq “ diag pd1ptq, d 2ptq, . . . , d mptqq . The Laplacian matrix of the graph at time t is 

Lptq “ Dptq ´ Y ptq.In the noisy consensus problem, a set of agents seeks to reach agreement over time. They resolve their differing opinions, which are given in x, through noisy network communication. We study the network con-sensus problem [2] under stochastic noise for time-varying graphs. The associated continuous-time dynamics are 

dxptq “ ´ Lptqxptqdt ` F d Wptq, (1) where F is the system noise matrix and dWptq is the m-dimensional standard Wiener process increment. Consensus is achieved when x “ α1m, where α P R is the agreement value. In the noisy leader-follower reference tracking problem, the agents seek to track an external reference signal θ P R such that xi represents agent i’s estimate of θ. A subset of agents assigned as the leaders directly measure θ, which is affected by noise, and the remaining agents are termed followers . All agents exchange information via noisy communications with their neighbors. The objective of the leaders is to drive the state of every agent to θ. The associated continuous-time dynamics are 

dxptq “ ´p Lptqxptq ` Kpxptq ´ θ1mqq dt ` F d Wptq, (2) where the leadership matrix K P Rmˆm is a diagonal matrix with entries tκ1, κ 2, . . . , κ mu. If agent i is a leader, then κi “ κ ą 0 such that the leaders share the same gain κ. If agent i is a follower, then κi = 0. The cardinality of the leader set K is given by |K|. Without loss of generality, we shift the origin of x to 

θ1m, reducing the dynamics in (2) to 

dxptq “ ´ M ptqxptqdt ` F d Wptq, (3) where M ptq “ Lptq ` K.We assess network performance using the following definitions of node and system errors, which apply only to systems for which the steady-state covariance exists. Define the node error Ei of node i as the steady-state variance of xi:EipΣss pxqq “ p Σss pxqq ii ,

where Σ ss pxq is the steady-state covariance of x. Define the system error E as the steady-state variance of 

x:EpΣss pxqq “ tr pΣss pxqq “ 

> m

ÿ

> i“1

EipΣss pxqq .

3We draw inspiration for these definitions from previous works, including [22, 14, 4, 23]. For the noisy consensus problem, the error quantifies the dispersion (or distance) from consensus and is thus inversely related to its robustness of consensus, as shown in [4]. For the noisy leader-follower reference tracking problem, the error indicates the success of the leader set in driving the agents’ states to the reference signal. 

## 2.2 Markov Switching Graph 

We study the two coordination problems under the assumption that the network switches between a finite set of graphs G “ t G1, . . . , G nu according to a Markov chain (MC). The resulting time-varying graph is known as a Markov switching graph (MSG). Under a given MSG G, the linear dynamical systems (1)-(18) are Markov jump linear systems (MJLS) [24]. Recall that the total number of possible unweighted graphs for a given finite node set is also finite. Hence, the set G is assumed to be finite without loss of generality. Let S “ t 1, . . . , n u be the graph index set. The graph switching behavior of the continuous-time system is governed by a continuous-time MC (CTMC). For the graph set G, the CTMC is specified by the infinitesimal time-homogeneous generator matrix Γ P Rnˆn with elements: Γij “

#

qij , i ‰ j, 

´vi, i “ j, 

for i, j P S. Here, vi “ ř 

> jPSzi

qij is the holding rate of graph Gi, and qij ě 0 is the transition rate from Gi

to Gj . Intuitively, qij is the rate parameter of an exponential distribution that determines the probability that the system in graph Gi transitions to graph Gj with time [25]. Note that all rows in Γ sum to 0, and 

´Γ is a Laplacian matrix. For the CTMC with the generator matrix Γ, let πptq P ∆n be the probability distribution over G at time 

t. Specifically, πiptq is the probability that the network graph is Gptq “ Gi, and řni“1 πiptq “ 1. Furthermore, 

πptq “ eΓJtπp0q [25]. The remainder of our analysis makes the following two assumptions about the MSG. 

Assumption 1. The MC underlying the MSG is ergodic .

Assumption 2. Every graph in the set G is unweighted, undirected, and connected. 

Under Assumption 1, the MC must have a unique stationary distribution πss such that lim tÑ8 πptq “ πss 

and lim kÑ8 πpkq “ πss for the CTMC and DTMC, respectively. An ergodic CTMC guarantees that GJ

has exactly one eigenvalue at 0 with the right eigenvector πss (i.e., πss “ eGJ

πss ), and all others in the left half-plane. An ergodic DTMC ensures that P J has exactly one eigenvalue at 1 with the right eigenvector 

πss (i.e., πss “ P Jπss ), and all others strictly within the unit circle in the complex plane. Assumption 2 can be relaxed under certain conditions, but for clarity of exposition, we keep it. 

## 2.3 Continuous-time Markov jump linear systems 

Consider the following continuous-time (CT) MJLS: 

dxptq “ ´ Zptqxptqdt ` F d Wptq, (4) where Zptq P Rmˆm corresponds to the network graph of the MSG at time t with the generator matrix Γ. Let Zptq “ Zi whenever Gptq “ Gi. Next, we obtain the dynamics of the mean and second moment of xptq

evolving according to (4). For the following proposition, let the mean μptq “ Erxptqs . The contribution of graph Gi P G to the mean is μiptq “ Erxptq1pGptq “ Giqs such that μptq “ řni“1 μiptq. Vertically stacking the means for all graphs gives the vector 

νptq “ r μ1ptqJ, μ2ptqJ, . . . , μnptqJsJ.

4Similarly, let the second moment Cptq “ ErxptqxptqJs. The contribution of graph Gi P G to the second moment is Ciptq “ ErxptqxptqJ1pGptq “ Giqs such that Cptq “ řni“1 Ciptq. Vertically stacking the vectorized second moments for all graphs gives the vector 

cptq “ r vec pC1ptqq J, vec pC2ptqq J, . . . , vec pCnptqq JsJ.

Finally, let Q “ F F J, N “ diag npZiq ´ ΓT b Im and M “ diag npZi ‘ Ziq ´ ΓJ b Im2 .

Proposition 1. The following statements hold for the CT MJLS (4) with an MSG satisfying Assumptions 1 and 2: (i). The dynamics of the mean term νptq are 

9νptq “ ´ N νptq; (5) 

(ii). The dynamics of the second moment term cptq are 

9cptq “ ´ Mcptq ` πptq b vec pQq. (6) 

Proof. This result is standard in MJLS literature. See, for example, [26, Proposition 3.5]. For completeness, we have included a short proof in Appendix II. 

# 3 Performance of distributed coordination under Markov switch-ing graphs 

In this section, we study and interpret the performance of the two noisy coordination problems described in Section 2 under MSGs. Let hS, 1 “ vec pImqJ and hS “ 1J 

> n

b hS, 1. Furthermore, let hiN, 1 “ vec pOimqq J

and hiN “ 1J 

> n

b hiN, 1, where Oim is the m ˆ m matrix containing all zeros except at element pi, i q, which takes the value 1. Then, hS c is the trace of second moment Erxx Js, and hiN c is its diagonal element pi, i q

corresponding to node i. At steady state, these expressions are the contribution of the second moment to the system and node errors, respectively. 

## 3.1 Noisy consensus under MSGs 

Let Nc and Mc be the system matrices in (5) and (6) after specializing Proposition 1 to the CT MJLS (1). 

Lemma 1. For the continuous-time noisy consensus dynamics (1) under Assumptions 1 and 2, both Nc and 

Mc have exactly one eigenvalue at 0 each; all other eigenvalues lie strictly in the right half-plane. Proof. When specializing Proposition 1 to the CT MJLS (1), Zi “ Li, and (4) reduces to (1). Consequently, 

Nc “ diag npLiq ´ ΓJ b Im and Mc “ diag npLi ‘ Liq ´ ΓJ b Im2 . We seek to show that N J 

> c

and MJ 

> c

are effectively the Laplacian matrices of two large graphs that contain nm and nm 2 nodes, respectively, and each has exactly one eigenvalue at 0. For N J 

> c

, diag npLiq is the Laplacian of a disconnected graph with n clusters, each of which is a connected subgraph as required. Therefore, the null space of diag npLiq is spanned by vectors of the form a b 1m for any a P Rn. Because Γ describes an ergodic CTMC, ´Γ b Im is the Laplacian of a connected graph, and the null space of ´Γ b Im is spanned by vectors of the form 1n b b for any b P Rm.The sum of two Laplacians is also a Laplacian. Furthermore, by Lemma 3.5 in [11], for two Laplacian matrices A and B, Null pA ` Bq “ Null pAq X Null pBq. Therefore, Null pN J 

> c

q is the intersection of space spanned by a b 1m and 1n b b, which is the space spanned by 1mn . Since the eigenvalues of a Laplacian are either at 0 or lie strictly in the right half-plane [27] and the nullity of N J 

> c

is 1, the transpose N , which shares its eigenvalues, has exactly one eigenvalue at 0. It can be verified that the corresponding right eigenvector is πss b 1m.It can be shown similarly that Mc has the unique right eigenvector πss b 1m2 corresponding to the eigenvalue at 0. 5Due to the eigenvalues of Nc and Mc at 0, the second moment of x for the CT MJLS (1) diverges. However, the diverging part corresponds to the fully correlated component of agents’ states. It therefore does not contribute to the deviation from consensus, and consequently should not affect the system and node errors. We thus seek to isolate and disregard this component of the second moment attributed to network consensus. Borrowing terminology from [28], we label the subspace of Rm spanned by 1m the 

consensus subspace and its orthogonal complement the disagreement subspace . We show that, as with the static graph [4], the second moments of x in (1) achieve bounded steady-state values when projected onto the disagreement subspace and, importantly, measure the distance from consensus as required for the calculation of the system and node errors. For the following propositions, let xK P Rm´1 represent the orthogonal projection of x onto the pm ´ 1q-dimensional disagreement subspace 1K

> m

. We pick V P Rpm´1qˆ m such that its rows form the orthonormal basis of 1K 

> m

and let V “ V JV “ I ´ 1 

> m

1m1J

> m

. Then, as in [4], let xK “ V x and ¯ x “ V JxK such that 

x “ 1 

> m

1m1J

> m

x ` ¯x. The vector ¯ x P Rm is the component of x orthogonal to the consensus subspace, and we refer to it as the disagreement vector. In addition, note that 1m is the right eigenvector of Lptq and Bpkq

associated with the eigenvalues 0 and 1, respectively. From (1), the continuous-time disagreement dynamics is 

d¯xptq “ ´ VLptq¯xptqdt ` VF d Wptq. (7) Lastly, mimicking the notation in Section 2.3, let ¯ μptq “ Ersxptqs , ¯ μiptq “ Ersxptq1pGptq “ Giqs , for each 

i P S, and ¯νptq “ r ¯μ1ptqJ, . . . , ¯μnptqJsJ.

Let sCptq, sCiptq and scptq, the second moment terms of sx, be defined analogously. 

Proposition 2. For the disagreement dynamics (7) under Assumptions 1 and 2, the following statements hold: (i). the steady-state mean disagreement vector is zero, i.e., 

¯νss “ 0nm , (8) 

where 0nm is the nm ˆ 1 vector of all zeros; (ii). the steady-state second moment of the disagreement vector is 

¯css “ ĎM` 

> c

pπss b vec pVQVqq , (9) 

where ĎMc “ diag npVLiV ‘ VLiVq ´ ΓJ b V b V.Proof. Recall that ¯ x “ Vx and V “ V2. Therefore, ¯ νi “ V¯νi and ¯ ci “ p V b Vq¯ci. Specializing Proposi-tion 1(i) to (7) gives 

9¯νptq “ ´ sNc ¯νptq,

where sNc “ diag npVLiVq ´ ΓJ b V. First, note that VLiV is also a Laplacian matrix and V “ Im ´ 1 

> m

1m1J

> m

.Then, by the same logic used in the proof of Lemma 1, X “ diag npVLiVq´ ΓJ bIm has exactly one eigenvalue at 0 with the eigenvector πss b 1m and all others in the right half-plane. Since the CTMC is ergodic, the remaining term in sNc, which is Γ J bp 1 

> m

1m1J

> m

q, has exactly n´1 non-zero eigenvalues, all of which are positive and map to the null space of X. This result means that the null space of sNc is equivalent to that of X, i.e., 

πss b 1m, and its non-zero eigenvalues lie in the right half-plane. Second, recall that ¯ x “ p Im ´ 1 

> m

1m1J

> m

qx.Since any component of x along the direction 1m is removed to get ¯ x, by its definition, ¯ ν has no component along πss b 1m. Thus, the eigenvalue at 0 is inconsequential, and ¯ ν has a steady-state solution. As all other eigenvalues lie in the right half-plane, the steady-state solution is ¯ νss “ 0nm , as stated in Proposition 2(i). 6Similarly, specializing Proposition 1(ii) to (7) gives 

9¯cptq “ ´ ĎMc¯cptq ` πptq b vec pVQVq.

where ĎMc “ diag npVLiV ‘ VLiVq ´ ΓJ b V b V. It can be shown analogously to sNc that ĎMc has exactly one eigenvalue at 0 with eigenvector πss b 1m2 that is inconsequential to the evolution of ¯ c and that all other eigenvalues of ĎMc lie in the right half-plane, meaning that there is a steady-state solution for ¯ cptq. At steady state, 9¯css “ 0nm 2 and πptq “ πss . Solving for ¯ css gives the result that is stated in Proposition 2(ii). These results imply that the steady-state second moment of the disagreement vector is equal to the steady-state covariance. As a result, the system and i-th node errors of (1) computed on the disagreement subspace are hS¯css and hiN ¯css , respectively. 

## 3.2 Noisy leader-follower reference tracking under MSGs 

Let Nk and Mk be the system matrices in (5) and (6) after specializing Proposition 1 to the CT MJLS (3). 

Lemma 2. For the continuous-time noisy leader-follower reference tracking dynamics (3) under Assump-tions 1 and 2, all eigenvalues of matrices Nk and Mk lie strictly in the right half-plane. Proof. When specializing Proposition 1 to the CT MJLS (3), Zi “ Li ` K “ Mi, and (4) reduces to (1). Consequently, Nk “ diag npMiq ´ ΓJ b Im and Mk “ diag npMi ‘ Miq ´ ΓJ b Im2 . It follows that Nk “

Nc ` In b K. From Lemma 1, N J 

> c

is a Laplacian matrix with the one-dimensional null space 1nm . Thus, Nk

is a diagonal perturbation of Nc and has all eigenvalues strictly in the right half-plane as long as |K| ą 0. It can be shown analogously that all eigenvalues of Mk also lie strictly in the right half-plane. Thus, in contrast to the noisy consensus problem, the noisy leader-follower reference tracking problem does not require the separation of consensus and disagreement subspaces since the presence of leaders removes the eigenvalue at 0 from Nk and Mk as well as that at 1 from Hk and Ak. For the following propositions, let the specialization of νptq and cptq in (5) and (6) to the CT MJLS (3) be ˆνptq and ˆcptq, respectively; let the specialization of νpkq and cpkq in (20) and (21) to the DT MJLS (18) be ˆνpkq and ˆcpkq, respectively. 

Proposition 3. For the leader-follower reference tracking dynamics (3) with |K| ą 0 and under Assump-tions 1 and 2, the following statements hold: (i). the steady-state mean of the state vector is zero, i.e., 

ˆνss “ 0nm ; (10) 

(ii). the steady-state second moment of the state vector is 

ˆcss “ M´1 

> k

pπss b vec pQqq , (11) 

where Mk “ diag npMi ‘ Miq ´ ΓJ b Im2 .Proof. For the CT MJLS (3), all eigenvalues of Nk lie strictly in the right half-plane, meaning that there is a steady-state solution for ˆ νptq. Since 9ˆνptq “ 0nm at steady state, it must be true that ˆ νss “ 0nm as stated in in Proposition 3(i). Similarly, since the eigenvalues of Mk also lie strictly in the right half-plane, there exists a steady-state solution for ˆ cptq. At steady state, 9ˆcptq “ 0nm 2 and πptq “ πss . Solving for ˆ cptq under these conditions yields the result for ˆ css stated in Proposition 3(ii). As in the previous subsection, only the steady-state second moment is needed to determine the system and i-th node errors of (3), which are given by hSˆcss and hiN ˆcss , respectively. Equations (9) and (11) express the relationship between performance and graph structure. Understanding these results can reveal how the graph topologies and switching behavior, which are encoded in M and A,7affect how well the MSG propagates information. However, unlike πss and Q, the effects of M and A on error are difficult to interpret due to the inverse matrices in (9) and (11). Intuitively, these matrices contain the most information since it is the inverse operation that, in effect, performs the mixing of graphs in G

according to Γ and P .

# 4 Robustness and leadership indices for MSGs 

The robustness of a system is measured by its deviation from the desired result. The deviation from consensus is isolated by projecting the system state onto the disagreement subspace. Proposition 2 shows that for noisy consensus under MSGs, this disagreement state is a stochastic process that, in the limit t Ñ `8 , has zero mean and finite covariance. The component of covariance along consensus subspace is disregarded because it is completely correlated and thus does not correspond to deviation from consensus (i.e., the covariance of 

xptq along the consensus subspace is spanned by 1m1J

> m

). As discussed in [4], the trace of the steady-state disagreement covariance, which we define as the system error, measures the mean squared distance of the system state from consensus and, for a fixed undirected graph, corresponds to the H2 norm of (7) [29, 30]. For a fixed graph, this value has been linked to graph resistances and used to assess the robustness of consensus. In a similar spirit, we propose a new notion of 

robustness of consensus for Markov switching graphs defined by 1 {p hS ¯css q and call it the system certainty index . This measure quantifies the efficacy of the MSGs in achieving consensus and allows for the ordering of MSGs by performance. As in [31], it can help in designing or dynamically rearranging MSG topologies for improved performance. The noisy consensus dynamics (1) is a continuum approximation to evidence aggregation in fixed-sample and sequential decision-making. Furthermore, the variance of each agent’s disagreement state, given by ¯ xi,reflects its decision-making accuracy [32] and illustrates the speed-accuracy trade-off [33]. Accordingly, the inverse of the steady-state variance of ¯ xi is described as the node certainty index in [32]. For a fixed graph, it was shown in [32] that the node certainty index is a monotone function of the node’s information centrality [34]. In a similar spirit, we introduce a novel notion of node certainty index for MSGs defined by 1 {p hiN ¯css q

for the node i. The node certainty index can be used to order the nodes in an MSG based on their accuracy in decision-making. The system error in the noisy leader-follower tracking is the mean squared tracking error for all agents. Thus, the system error is a measure of the robustness of tracking in the presence of noise. The choice of nodes selected as leaders largely dictates the tracking performance. Consequently, the leader selection problem has received significant attention for fixed noisy consensus networks [14, 15, 17, 16, 35]. For the fixed graph with |K| “ 1, [16] shows that the most information-central node minimizes the system error when assigned as the leader. The system error due to multiple leaders was used to define the notion of joint centrality for multiple nodes, and its relation to network resistances is explored in [16]. The system error is used to define centrality measures for fixed consensus networks in [36]. In a similar spirit, we define joint robustness centrality of a set of leaders K in MSGs as the inverse of the system error for (3) with leader set K and in the limit κ Ñ `8 , i.e., lim κÑ`8 1{p hSˆcss q.

# 5 Analysis of the Two-Topology MSG 

In this section, we dissect the results for the simple two-topology continuous-time MSG in order to understand the mechanisms affecting the performance of a switching network. Let n “ 2. Then, the generator matrix is Γ “

„´v1 v1

v2 ´v2

ȷ

“ β

„´πss ,2 πss ,2

πss ,1 ´πss ,1

ȷ

, (12) where β “ v1 ` v2 and πss “ 1 

> β

rv2 v1sJ is the stationary distribution. Let α “ βπ ss ,1πss ,2.8Furthermore, let Li “ p VLiV ‘ VLiVq`. Then, by Proposition 2, ¯ css ,i “ Livec pVQVq is the vectorized disagreement covariance for the single-topology static graph Gi with dynamics (1). Lastly, we define: 

sEstatic “ hS, 1pπss ,1¯css ,1 ` πss ,2¯css ,2q

sΩ “ p V b Vqp πss ,2L1 ` πss ,1L2q

¯cdiff “ p V b Vqp ¯css ,2 ´ ¯css ,1q

hS, diff “ hS,1pL2 ´ L1q.

Proposition 4. For n “ 2, β sufficiently small, and under Assumptions 1 and 2, the system error of the noisy consensus CT MJLS (1) computed on the disagreement subspace is E “ sEstatic ´ αhS, diff pIm2 ` β sΩq´1¯cdiff . (13) 

Substituting hiN for hS yields an equivalent equation for the i-th node error. These results follow from Proposition 2. Proof. We begin by writing ĎMc “ R1 ´ βR 2, where 

R1 “ diag npVLiV ‘ VLiVq, R 2 “

„´πss ,2 πss ,1

πss ,2 ´πss ,1

ȷ

b V b V.

Recall the system error is E “ hS ĎM` 

> c

T , where T “ πss b vec pVQVq.We choose to represent ĎM` 

> c

“ ř8 

> p“0

βpUp. Noting that ĎMc ĎM` 

> c

“ Π, where Π “ Inm 2 ´ 1 

> nm 2

1nm 2 1J 

> nm 2

,we expand the series and solve for the matrices Ur by matching terms with the same power of β with the result that Up “ p R` 

> 1

R2qpR` 

> 1

.Note that 

R` 

> 1

T “

„πss ,1¯css ,1

πss ,2¯css ,2

ȷ

and hS R` 

> 1

T “ sEstatic .

Some detailed calculations yield 

hS pR` 

> 1

R2qp “ p´ 1qp´1hS „´πss ,2pL2 ´ L1qΩp´1pV b Vq

πss ,1pL2 ´ L1qΩp´1pV b Vq

ȷ

,

and 

hS βpR` 

> 1

R2qpR` 

> 1

T “ p´ 1qp´1αhS, diff Ωp´1¯cdiff .

Collecting the terms and using the Neumann series, which is guaranteed to converge for small β, we have E “ sEstatic ´ αhS, diff pIm2 ` β sΩq´1¯cdiff ,

For the next proposition, we define Mi “ p Mi ‘ Miq`, css ,i “ Mivec pQq, and: Estatic “ hS, 1pπss ,1css ,1 ` πss ,2css ,2q

Ω “ πss ,2M1 ` πss ,1M2

cdiff “ css ,2 ´ css ,1

hS, diff “ hS,1pM2 ´ M1q.

Proposition 5. For n “ 2, β sufficiently small, and under Assumptions 1 and 2, the system error of the noisy leader-follower reference tracking CT MJLS (3) is E “ Estatic ´ αhS,diff pIm2 ` βΩq`cdiff . (14) 

Substituting hiN for hS yields an equivalent equation for the i-th node error. These results follow from Proposition 3. 

9Proof. Repeat the proof of Proposition 4 substituting Mk for ĎMc, Im for V, Inm 2 for Π, Mi for Li, css ,i for ¯css ,i , and so on. We now focus our discussion on the noisy consensus problem and Proposition 4. However, our conclusions straightforwardly apply to Proposition 5 as well. The error for the two-topology MSG consists of two main components. The first is sEstatic , which represents the baseline error incurred for the simplest MSG: the non-switching network. In other words, suppose the system initially enters into graph Gi with probability πss ,i and remains in Gi thereafter. Then, the error, which is averaged over an infinite number of instances of the MSG, would be sEstatic .Consequently, the second term reflects the effect of graph switching on the error. It is helpful to note that it resembles the expression for system error: hS ĎM` 

> c

vec pVQVq. In that case, the elements of vec pVQVq

scale with the level of noise experienced by the agents, and hS is used to extract the elements that contribute to the system error; for both, greater values mean greater error. This comparison suggests that the impact of graph switching on performance is directly related to the dissimilarity of the two topologies. Not only do greater values in hS, diff and ¯ cdiff increase the magnitude of the second term, but they do so by selectively scaling the elements of pIm2 ` βΩq` corresponding to the largest differences. Extending the analogy further, pIm2 `βΩq, which mirrors ĎMc in the system error expression, encodes the topologies and generator matrix of some network. Although this network is difficult to interpret, it is clear that pIm2 ` βΩq and its pseudoinverse are positive semi-definite. If we make the reasonable assumption that each agent is independently affected by noise such that F “ Q “ I, then hJ 

> S, diff

“ ¯cdiff . By the definition of positive semi-definite matrices, hS, diff pIm2 ` β sΩq`¯cdiff ě 0. Due to the negative sign before the second term, this finding means that, given two graphs and the proportion of time the system must spend in each, allowing the network to switch between them cannot hurt its performance. In short, graph switching is favorable. We hypothesize that this holds true for any reasonable system noise matrix F (e.g. positive diagonal elements), and we have not encountered evidence to the contrary. Furthermore, α ą 0 scales with the sum q12 ` q21 . As 

qij indicates the propensity of the system to switch out of Gi into Gj , larger values of α correspond to more frequent graph switching. Since α scales the non-negative expression hS, diff pIm2 ` β sΩq`¯cdiff , more frequent switching gives lower error. We conclude that, for the two-topology MSG, the act of switching between graphs lowers or does not change the error. In the former case, increasing the rate of switching further improves performance; we prove this for F “ I and speculate that it is generally true. Moreover, we find that more dissimilar topologies produce better MSGs. This result applies analogously to Proposition 5. We believe that the intuitions developed in this section apply for arbitrarily large MSGs. 

# 6 Numerical Illustrations 

In this section, we illustrate the results of the previous sections by simulating simple MSGs. For all examples, 

F “ I.First, we examine the noisy consensus dynamics (1) under MSGs with the state space G comprising the line and ring graphs shown in Figs. 1(a)-(b) and the generator matrix Γ “ ϵ

„´r12 r12 

r21 ´r21 

ȷ

, (15) where qij “ vi “ ϵr ij . Recall that Γ’s off-diagonal elements qij scale with the MSG’s propensity to switch from Gi to Gj . Accordingly, ϵ controls the network’s overall rate of graph switching. We fix ϵ “ 0.5 and study the system and node certainty indices as functions of r12 and r21 in Fig. 1(c)-(d). Fig. 1 illustrates that, in general, the MSG benefits from spending more time in the more connected topology. In this case, the performance improves when the MSG lingers in the ring topology (low r21 ) and/or transitions to the ring more frequently (high r12 ). Fig. 1(c) also suggests that if r12 is sufficiently high compared to r21 , the performance only improves marginally for rising r12 , which reveals that lengthening the time the system 10 spends as a ring has diminishing returns. Fig. 1(d) demonstrates that the nodes do not benefit equally from the addition of edge p1, 5q. In addition, the certainty curve of node 3 shows that, for this MSG, only the shortest paths between nodes affects success as node 3 does not benefit from additional longer routes to previously accessible nodes (e.g. the extra path 3-4-5-1 in the ring does not improve node 3’s certainty since the shorter path 3-2-1 already exists in the line).              

> (a) (b)
> (c)
> (d) Figure 1: Noisy consensus dynamics (1) under MSG with state space comprising a line graph G1shown in panel (a) and a ring graph G2shown in panel (b), and defined by the parametrized generator matrix (15). For fixed ϵ“0.5, panels (c) and (d) chart the system and node certainty indices, respectively, across various r12 and r21 values.

Second, we investigate the noisy consensus dynamics (1) under the MSGs with G comprising graphs 

G1, G 2, G3, shown in Figs. 2(a), (b), (c), respectively, and the generator matrix Γ “ ϵ

»–´r12 r12 0

r2j ´2r2j r2j

0 r32 ´r32 

fi fl , (16) where we set r12 “ r32 and r2j “ 0.05. The system cannot transition directly between G1 and G3. Unlike in the previous case, this MSG comprises three equally connected topologies that would individually produce identical system errors. We illustrate system and node certainty indices as a function of q12 and ϵ in Figs. 2(d)-(e). The system certainty curves in Fig. 2(d) are concave and contain finite non-zero global maxima, which indicates that, unlike in the simpler line-graph case, the optimal MSG prefers to switch between graphs in order to balance the information flow across the nodes. Fig. 2(e) shows three revealing facts. First, some nodes gain from increasing q12 while others worsen, which causes the maxima in system certainty. Second, node 3 clearly does best with increasing q12 . Interestingly, node 2 also benefits from spending more time in G2 despite its central placement in G3, suggesting that obtaining a highly central position is less crucial 11 than avoiding the least central ones. Finally, as ϵ increases, the certainty indices rise, meaning that, for the same stationary distribution, performance improves when switching occurs more often.               

> (a) (b)
> (c)
> (d)
> (e) Figure 2: Noisy consensus dynamics (1) under MSG with state space comprising G1, G 2and G3shown in panels (a), (b), and (c), respectively, and defined by the parametrized generator matrix (16) with v2“0.1. Panels (d) and (e) chart the system and node certainty indices, respectively, for various v1and ϵvalues.
> (a) (b) Figure 3: Two topologies of a five-node MSG.

Lastly, we study the noisy leader-follower reference tracking problem (3) and the robustness centrality index. Consider the MSG comprising the two graphs in Fig. 3 and defined by the generator matrix (15) with q12 “ q21 “ 1. Then, for κ “ 8 , ϵ small, and |K| “ 1, the nodes listed in order of decreasing robustness centrality (i.e., leader potential) are 1-3-4-5-2. However, for ϵ “ 1, the nodes listed in order of decreasing node certainty are 3-1-4-5-2; interestingly, for ϵ “ 10, the ordering again becomes 1-3-4-5-2. Thus, the set of agents with the greatest combined node certainty does not reliably predict the optimal leader set. This result contrasts with the static graph, for which it always holds true [16]. 12 7 Conclusion and Future Work 

In this paper, we studied the noisy distributed consensus and noisy leader-follower reference tracking problems under Markov switching graphs (MSGs). We derived performance measures that quantify robustness of consensus, node certainty, and joint centrality in both continuous- and discrete-time settings. By specializing to the case of switching between two graph topologies, we obtained analytical insights into how switching rates and network structure influence system performance. Through numerical examples, we further illustrated how both the topology and switching dynamics affect consensus and tracking behavior. Notably, we observed that the optimal leader set for reference tracking does not necessarily correspond to the agents with the highest combined node certainty for the static graphs. This work opens several promising directions for future research. One is to better understand and characterize the structure of the matrix M that governs steady-state performance. Another is to develop efficient algorithms for optimal leader selection in noisy, Markov-switching networks. Additional extensions include relaxing our current assumptions to accommodate directed, weighted, or disconnected graphs. 

# Appendix I Discrete Time Consensus Networks 

For the analogous discrete-time systems, each time step is denoted by k ě 0. At some time step k, the network graph is given by Gpkq “ p V, Epkq, Y pkqq and parallels the continuous-time system described at the beginning of this subsection. The discrete-time dynamics for the noisy consensus problem are 

xpk ` 1q “ Bpkqxpkq ` F vpkq, (17) where xpkq is the system state at time step k, Bpkq “ e´Lpkq is the averaging matrix, and F is the covariance matrix for the system noise vpkq P N p0m, Imq.Similarly, the discrete-time dynamics for the leader-follower reference tracking problem are 

xpk ` 1q “ Apkqxpkq ` F vpkq, (18) where Apkq “ e´p Lpkq` Kq “ e´M pkq.We first recall some results for a general discrete-time MJLS. Consider the following discrete-time (DT) MJLS: 

xpk ` 1q “ W pkqxpkq ` F vpkq, (19) where W pkq P Rmˆm maps to the network graph of the MSG at time step k with transition probability matrix P . Specifically, W pkq “ Wi whenever Gpkq “ Gi. Next, we obtain the dynamics of the moments of 

xpkq evolving according to (19). The following notation aligns with that of Section 2.3. Let the mean μpkq “ Erxpkqs and μipkq “ 

Erxpkq1pGpkq “ Giqs such that μpkq “ řni“1 μipkq. As for the CT MJLS, vertically stacking the means for all graphs gives the vector νpkq. Furthermore, let the second moment Cpkq “ ErxpkqxpkqJs and Cipkq “ 

ErxpkqxpkqJ1pGpkq “ Giqs such that Cpkq “ řni“1 Cipkq. Vertically stacking the vectorized second moments for all graphs gives the vector cpkq. Finally, let H “ p P T bImqdiag npWiq and A “ p P J bIm2 qdiag npWi bWiq.

Proposition 6. The following statements hold for the DT MJLS (19) with an MSG satisfying Assumptions 1 and 2: (i). The dynamics of the mean term νpkq is 

νpk ` 1q “ Hνpkq; (20) 

(ii). The dynamics of the second moment term cpkq is 

cpk ` 1q “ Acpkq ` πpk ` 1q b vec pQq. (21) 13 Proof. This result is standard in MJLS literature. See, for example, [24, Chapter 4]. For completeness, we have included a short proof in Appendix III. We now establish the discrete-time equivalents of Lemma 1 and Proposition 2. Let Hc and Ac be the system matrices in (20) and (21) after specializing Proposition 6 to the DT MJLS (17). In the following, the time t in the notation in Section 3.1 is substituted with the time step k for the discrete-time notation of ¯μpkq, and so on. 

Lemma 3. For the discrete-time noisy consensus dynamics (17) under Assumptions 1 and 2, both Hc and 

Ac have exactly one eigenvalue at 1 each; all other eigenvalues lie strictly within the unit circle of the complex plane. Proof. When specializing Proposition 6 to the DT MJLS (17), Wi “ Bi, and (19) reduces to (17). Conse-quently, Hc “ p P J b Imqdiag npBiq and Ac “ p P J b Im2 qdiag npBi b Biq.Let Λ 1pXq be the eigenspace of 1 for matrix X, and |λz1pXq| ă 1 means that all eigenvalues of X other than those at 1 lie strictly within the unit circle of the complex plane. For an ergodic DTMC, Λ 1pP q “ t 1nu,and |λz1pP q| ă 1. Therefore, Λ 1pP b Imq “ tp 1n b aq@ a P Rmu. In addition, since all graphs in G are connected, Λ 1pBiq “ t 1mu, and |λz1pBiq| ă 1 for all i P S. As a result, Λ 1pdiag npBiqq “ tp b b 1mq@ b P Rnu.As |λz1pP bImq| ă 1 and |λz1pdiag npBiqq| ă 1, it must be true that Λ 1pH J 

> c

q “ Λ1pP bImqX Λ1pdiag npBiqq “ t1mn u. Its transpose Hc must also have exactly one eigenvalue at 1. It is straightforward to verify that the associated right eigenvector is πss b 1m. By the Perron-Frobenius theorem, |λz1pHcq| ă 1. It follows similarly that Ac has a unique eigenvector πss b 1m2 corresponding to the eigenvalue at 1 and 

|λz1pAcq| ă 1. From (17), the discrete-time disagreement dynamics is ¯xpk ` 1q “ VBpkq¯xpkq ` VF vpkq. (22) 

Proposition 7. For the disagreement dynamics (22) under Assumptions 1 and 2, the following statements hold: (i). the steady-state mean disagreement vector is zero, i.e., 

¯νss “ 0nm ; (23) 

(ii). the steady-state second moment of the disagreement vector is 

¯css “ p Inm 2 ´ sAcq`pπss b vec pVQVqq , (24) 

where sAc “ p P J b V b Vqdiag npVBiV b VBiVq.Proof. For the following proof parallels, refer to the proofs of Proposition 2 and Lemma 3 for details when needed. Specializing Proposition 6(i) to (7) gives ¯νpk ` 1q “ ´ sHc ¯νpkq,

where sHc “ p P J b Imqdiag npVBiq. Since V is the projector onto the disagreement subspace, VBi removes the eigenvalue of Bi at 1 and replaces it with an eigenvalue at 0. As a result, all eigenvalues of diag npVBiq

lie strictly within the unit circle of the complex plane. From the proof of Lemma 3, we conclude that all eigenvalues of sHc also lie strictly within the unit circle as well, meaning that the solution at steady state is ¯νss “ 0nm , as stated in Proposition 7(i). Similarly, specializing Proposition 6(ii) to (22) gives ¯cpk ` 1q “ ¯Ac¯cpkq ` πpk ` 1q b vec pVQVq.

where ¯Ac “ p P J b Im2 qdiag npVBi ‘ VBiq. It can be shown analogously to sHc that all eigenvalues of ¯Ac

fall inside the unit circle, and a steady solution for ¯ cpkq exists. At steady state, ¯ css “ ¯cpk ` 1q “ ¯cpkq and 

πpkq “ πss . Solving for ¯ css gives the result that is stated in Proposition 7(ii). 14 We now extend Lemma 2 and Proposition 3 to the discrete-time setting. Let Hk and Ak be the system matrices in (20) and (21) after specializing Proposition 6 to the DT MJLS (18). 

Lemma 4. For the discrete-time noisy leader-follower reference tracking dynamics (18) under Assumptions 1 and 2, all eigenvalues of matrices Nk and Mk lie strictly within the unit circle of the complex plane. Proof. When specializing Proposition 6 to the DT MJLS (18), Wi “ e´p Li`Kq “ Ai, and (19) reduces to (17). Consequently, Hk “ p P J b Imqdiag npAiq and Ak “ p P J b Im2 qdiag npAi b Aiq. For |K| ą 0, the eigenvalues of Li ` K lie strictly in the right half-plane, meaning that those of Ai lie strictly within the unit circle. Using the same logic as in the proof of Lemma 3, all eigenvalues of Hk also lie strictly within the unit circle. It can be shown analogously that all eigenvalues of Ak lie strictly within the unit circle. 

Proposition 8. For the leader-follower reference tracking dynamics (18) with |K| ą 0 and under Assump-tions 1 and 2, the following statements hold: (i). the steady-state mean of the state vector is zero, i.e., 

ˆνss “ 0nm ; (25) 

(ii). the steady-state second moment of the state vector is 

ˆcss “ p Inm 2 ´ Akq´1pπss b vec pQqq , (26) 

where Ak “ p P J b Im2 qdiag npAi b Aiq.Proof. For the DT MJLS (18), all eigenvalues of Hk and Ak lie strictly within the unit circle, meaning that there are steady-state solutions for ˆ νpkq and ˆ cpkq. Since ˆ νpk ` 1q “ ˆνpkq at steady state, it must be true that ˆ νss “ 0nm as stated in in Proposition 8(i). Similarly, at steady state, ˆ cpk ` 1q “ ˆcpkq and πpkq “ πss .Solving for ˆ cpkq under these conditions yields the result for ˆ css stated in Proposition 8(ii). 

Remark 1. The results of Propositions 4 and 5 can be easily extended to the discrete time case. Specifically, let the state transition matrix be 

P “

„1 ´ v1 v1

v2 1 ´ v2

ȷ

“

„1 ´ βπ ss ,2 βπ ss ,2

βπ ss ,1 1 ´ βπ ss ,1

ȷ

,

where β “ v1 ` v2 and πss “ 1 

> β

rv2 v1sJ is the stationary distribution. The system error is E “ hS ĎM` 

> d

T ,where ĎMd “ R1 ´ βR 2 with 

R1 “ p Inm 2 ´ p I2 b V b Vqdiag npVBiV b VBiVq,R2 “

ˆ„ ´πss ,2 πss ,2

πss ,1 ´πss ,1

ȷ

b V b V

˙

diag npVBiV b VBiVq.

Analogous steps to the proof of Proposition 4 can be employed to derive similar expressions. ˝

# References 

[1] S. H. Cen, V. Srivastava, and N. E. Leonard, “On robustness and leadership in Markov switching consensus networks,” in IEEE Conf. on Decision and Control , (Melbourne, Australia), pp. 1701–1706, Dec. 2017. [2] R. Olfati-Saber, J. A. Fax, and R. M. Murray, “Consensus and cooperation in networked multi-agent systems,” Proceedings of the IEEE , vol. 95, no. 1, pp. 215–233, 2007. 15 [3] W. Ren, R. W. Beard, and E. M. Atkins, “A survey of consensus problems in multi-agent coordination,” in American Control Conference , pp. 1859–1864, IEEE, 2005. [4] G. F. Young, L. Scardovi, and N. E. Leonard, “Robustness of noisy consensus dynamics with directed communication,” in American Control Conference , pp. 6312–6317, IEEE, 2010. [5] D. Zelazo and M. Burger, “On the robustness of uncertain consensus networks,” IEEE Transactions on Control of Network Systems , 2015. [6] M. Siami and N. Motee, “Fundamental limits and tradeoffs on disturbance propagation in linear dy-namical networks,” IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control , vol. 61, no. 12, pp. 4055–4062, 2016. [7] B. Bamieh, M. R. Jovanovic, P. Mitra, and S. Patterson, “Coherence in large-scale networks: Dimension-dependent limitations of local feedback,” IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control , vol. 57, no. 9, pp. 2235–2249, 2012. [8] L. Xiao, S. Boyd, and S.-J. Kim, “Distributed average consensus with least-mean-square deviation,” 

Journal of Parallel and Distributed Computing , vol. 67, no. 1, pp. 33–46, 2007. [9] M. Pirani, A. Mitra, and S. Sundaram, “Graph-theoretic approaches for analyzing the resilience of distributed control systems: A tutorial and survey,” Automatica , vol. 157, p. 111264, 2023. [10] L. Moreau, “Stability of multiagent systems with time-dependent communication links,” IEEE Trans-actions on Automatic Control , vol. 50, no. 2, pp. 169–182, 2005. [11] I. Matei, J. S. Baras, and C. Somarakis, “Convergence results for the linear consensus problem under Markovian random graphs,” SIAM Journal on Control and Optimization , vol. 51, no. 2, pp. 1574–1591, 2013. [12] A. Tahbaz-Salehi and A. Jadbabaie, “Consensus over ergodic stationary graph processes,” IEEE Trans-actions on Automatic Control , vol. 55, no. 1, pp. 225–230, 2010. [13] B. Touri and A. Nedic, “On ergodicity, infinite flow, and consensus in random models,” IEEE Transac-tions on Automatic Control , vol. 56, no. 7, pp. 1593–1605, 2011. [14] S. Patterson and B. Bamieh, “Leader selection for optimal network coherence,” in IEEE Conference on Decision and Control , pp. 2692–2697, IEEE, 2010. [15] F. Lin, M. Fardad, and M. R. Jovanovic, “Algorithms for leader selection in stochastically forced consensus networks,” IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control , vol. 59, no. 7, pp. 1789–1802, 2014. [16] K. Fitch and N. E. Leonard, “Joint centrality distinguishes optimal leaders in noisy networks,” IEEE Transactions on Control of Network Systems , vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 366–378, 2015. [17] A. Clark, L. Bushnell, and R. Poovendran, “A supermodular optimization framework for leader selection under link noise in linear multi-agent systems,” IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control , vol. 59, no. 2, pp. 283–296, 2014. [18] A. Shrinate and T. Tripathy, “Towards influence centrality: where to not add an edge in the network?,” in European Control Conference , (Thessaloniki, Greece), June 2025. available at: arXiv:2412.20112. [19] R. Vafaee and M. Siami, “Real-time sensor selection for time-varying networks with guaranteed perfor-mance,” Automatica , vol. 163, p. 111550, 2024. [20] O. L. do Valle Costa, M. D. Fragoso, and M. G. Todorov, Continuous-time Markov Jump Linear Systems .Springer Science & Business Media, 2012. 16 [21] O. L. V. Do Costa, R. P. Marques, and M. D. Fragoso, Discrete-time Markov Jump Linear Systems .Springer, 2005. [22] K. Fitch and N. E. Leonard, “Information centrality and optimal leader selection in noisy networks,” in IEEE Conference on Decision and Control , pp. 7510–7515, IEEE, 2013. [23] I. Poulakakis, L. Scardovi, and N. E. Leonard, “Node certainty in collective decision making,” in Decision and Control (CDC), 2012 IEEE 51st Annual Conference on , pp. 4648–4653, IEEE, 2012. [24] V. Gupta, R. M. Murray, L. Shi, and B. Sinopoli, “Networked sensing, estimation and control systems,” 

California Institute of Technology Report , 2009. [25] G. Grimmett and D. Stirzaker, Probability and Random Processes . Probability and Random Processes, OUP Oxford, 2001. [26] X. Feng, K. A. Loparo, Y. Ji, and H. J. Chizeck, “Stochastic stability properties of jump linear systems,” 

IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control , vol. 37, no. 1, pp. 38–53, 1992. [27] R. Agaev and P. Chebotarev, “On the spectra of nonsymmetric Laplacian matrices,” Linear Algebra and its Applications , vol. 399, pp. 157–168, 2005. [28] G. F. Young, Optimising robustness of consensus to noise on directed networks . PhD thesis, Princeton University, 2014. [29] P. Barooah and J. P. Hespanha, “Estimation from relative measurements: Electrical analogy and large graphs,” IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing , vol. 56, no. 6, pp. 2181–2193, 2008. [30] G. F. Young, L. Scardovi, and N. E. Leonard, “A new notion of effective resistance for directed graphs-part I: Definition and properties,” IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control , vol. 61, no. 7, pp. 1727– 1736, 2016. [31] G. F. Young, L. Scardovi, and N. E. Leonard, “Rearranging trees for robust consensus,” in IEEE Conference on Decision and Control and European Control Conference , pp. 1000–1005, 2011. [32] I. Poulakakis, G. F. Young, L. Scardovi, and N. E. Leonard, “Information centrality and ordering of nodes for accuracy in noisy decision-making networks,” IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control ,vol. 61, no. 4, pp. 1040–1045, 2016. [33] V. Srivastava and N. E. Leonard, “Collective decision-making in ideal networks: The speed-accuracy trade-off,” IEEE Transactions on Control of Network Systems , vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 121–132, 2014. [34] K. Stephenson and M. Zelen, “Rethinking centrality: Methods and examples,” Social Networks , vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 1–37, 1989. [35] S. Patterson, N. McGlohon, and K. Dyagilev, “Optimal k-leader selection for coherence and convergence rate in one-dimensional networks,” IEEE Transactions on Control of Network Systems , 2016. [36] M. Siami, S. Bolouki, B. Bamieh, and N. Motee, “Centrality measures in linear consensus networks with structured network uncertainties,” IEEE Transactions on Control of Network Systems , 2017. [37] R. Horn and C. Johnson, Topics in Matrix Analysis . Cambridge University Press, 1994. 17 Appendix II Proof of Proposition 1 

To prove Proposition 1, we require the following lemma. 

Lemma 5. Let event B Ă J , where J is a finite sample space. Then, for a random variable Y and another event A,

ErY 1pAqs “ ÿ

> jPJ

ErY |A X B “ js Pr pA|B “ jq Pr pB “ jq,

where j is an outcome of J .Proof. (Lemma 5) For the probability density function f pyq and some event C, ErY 1pCqs “ ş yf py|Cq Pr pCqdy “

ErY |Cs Pr pCq. Let ErY 1pAqs “ ř 

> jPJ

ErY 1pA X B “ jqs . We complete the proof by letting C “ A X p B “

jq.

Proof. (Proposition 1) Within this proof, we abbreviate aptq “ at and biptq “ bi,t . Then, for some small time increment h, we rewrite (4) as xt`h “ p Im ´ hZ tqxt ` F d Wphq where Zt “ Zi if Gt “ Gi P G is the network graph at time t. For j ‰ i, let pii phq “ Pr pGt`h “ Gi|Gt “ Giq « 1 ´ vih ` Oph2q

pji phq “ Pr pGt`h “ Gi|Gt “ Gj q « qji h ` Oph2q,

where i, j P S. Then, from Lemma 5, 

μit`h “ ÿ

> jPS

Erxt`h|Gt “ Gj spji phqπj,t 

“ p Im ´ hZ iqμitp1 ´ vihq ` ÿ

> jPSzi

hq ji pIm ´ hZ j qμjt .

We take the derivative 9μit “ lim hÑ0pμit`h ´ μitq{ h:

9μit “ ´p Zi ` viImqμit ` ÿ

> jPSzi

vj pji μjt

“ ´ Ziμit ` ÿ

> jPS

Γji μjt ,

Vertically stacking 9μit for all i P S into an mn ˆ 1 vector gives the result that is stated in Proposition 1(i). Similarly, 

Cit`h “ ÿ

> jPS

Erxt`hxJ

> t`h

|Gt`h “ Gi, Gt “ Gj spji phqπj,t 

“ p Cit ´ hZ iCit ´ hC it ZJ 

> i

´ vihC it q` ÿ

> jPSzi

Cjt hq ji ` πi,t `hhQ ` Oph2q.

We take the derivative 9Cit “ lim hÑ0pCit`h ´ Cit q{ h:

9Cit “ ´p ZiCit ` Cit ZJ 

> i

` viCit q ` ÿ

> jPSzi

Cjt qji ` πi,t Q

“ ´p ZiCit ` Cit ZJ 

> i

q ` ÿ

> jPS

Cjt Γji ` πi,t Q. 

18 Then, let cit “ vec pCit q and vectorize the previous equation with the help of the rule vec pAXB q “ p BJ b

Aqvec pXq for matrices A, X, and B [37]. As a result, 

9cit “ ´p Zi ‘ Ziqcit ` ÿ

> jPS

Γji cjt ` πi,t vec pQq,

which, when stacked vertically for all i P S into an nm 2 ˆ1 vector, gives the result that is stated in Proposition 1(ii). 

# Appendix III Proof of Proposition 6 

This proof parallels that in Appendix II, which may contain information relevant to this section. First, let 

Wk “ Wi if Gk “ Gi P G is the network graph at time step k. From 5, 

μik “ ÿ

> jPS

Erxk|Gk´1 “ Gj sPji πj,k ´1 “ ÿ

> jPS

Wj μjk´1Pji .

Then, vertically stacking μik for all i P S into an mn ˆ 1 vector gives the result stated in 6(i). Similarly, 

Cik “ ÿ

> jPS

ErxkxJ 

> k

|Gk “ Gi, Gk´1 “ Gj sPji πj,k ´1

“ ÿ

> jPS

Wj Cjk´1W J 

> j

Pji ` πi,k Q. 

Vectorizing this equation yields: 

cik “ ÿ

> jPS

Pji pWj b Wj qcik´1 ` πi,k vec pQq,

which, when stacked vertically for all i P S into an nm 2 ˆ1 vector, gives the result that is stated in Proposition 6(ii). Similarly, the graph switching behavior of the discrete-time MSG with the graph set G is determined by a discrete-time MC (DTMC). The DTMC is described by the transition probability matrix P P Rnˆn

containing the elements: 

Pij pkq “ Pr prpkq “ j|rpk ´ 1q “ iq,

for i, j P S. Additionally, P is time-homogeneous, meaning that it is independent of k, and row-stochastic. As for the CTMC, the probability distribution of the DTMC at time step k is given by πpkq P ∆n. In this case, πpkq “ p P Jqkπp0q.19