Title: Taking the Whys Seriously: Limitations of Counterfactual Explanations in Justification and Recourse

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.30956v1

Published Time: Tue, 01 Sep 2026 02:57:43 GMT

Number of Pages: 14

Markdown Content:
# Taking the Whys Seriously: Limitations of Counterfactual Explanations in Justification and Recourse 

# Mattia Cerrato 1* , Otto Sahlgren 2* , Xenia Heilmann 1

> 1

Johannes Gutenberg University Mainz, Germany 

> 2

University of Tampere, Finland mcerrato@uni-mainz.de, otto.sahlgren@tuni.fi, xheilmann@uni-mainz.de 

Abstract 

Counterfactual explanations (CEs) are widely used in ex-plainable artificial intelligence (AI) to show how a model’s outputs would change if the input features were manipulated. This technique is used for a range of tasks such as debugging models, explaining predictions, justifying decisions, and pro-viding algorithmic recourse. In this paper, we explore the nor-mative legitimacy of employing counterfactuals in real-life model deployment settings. We discuss the different stakes involved in these different purposes for which CEs are com-monly employed, and find stricter requirements for justifica-tion and recourse. In particular, we find that naive application of CEs for justification and recourse can lead to ignoring con-testable choices made throughout the machine learning (ML) pipeline, thus obfuscating that decisions and counterfactuals for those decisions are also artifacts of an organization’s ma-terialized design and governance choices. We demonstrate this with four empirical experiments involving interventions at stages of the ML pipeline “upstream” of the explanation itself, and show that these affect the generated counterfactu-als. We find that an organization’s choices on measurement models for feature and labels, business requirements, model validation, and the metric of model success have as much or more impact on the generated counterfactuals as the specifics of the generating method. Our findings underline the need to account for such choices upon providing justification and re-course, providing a stark reminder of the relational nature of these tasks. As putative justifications or recourse recommen-dations, CEs do not provide adequate answers to some impor-tant ”why”-questions because they preclude consideration of whether the decision-maker ought to have acted differently. 

# Introduction 

The growing adoption of machine learning (ML) systems in high-stakes decision-making contexts has spurred research on the interrelated notions of transparency, explainability, and interpretability. Transparency, generally defined as “the availability of information about an actor that allows other actors to monitor the workings or performance of the first actor” (Meijer 2013, p.430), lacks a unique and well-defined equivalent in the context of ML systems. Instead, multiple notions of “algorithmic transparency” can be defined in re-lation to different objects and subcomponents as subject to 

> *

These authors contributed equally. 

transparency, where the transparency thereof can take dif-ferent forms and gradations (Diakopoulos 2025, p.199). For example, “algorithmic transparency” can refer to the code, datasets, algorithms or their purposes and use-cases being disclosed in an understandable form to some audience. One of the most celebrated techniques to this end is the generation of counterfactual explanations (CEs) (Wachter, Mittelstadt, and Russell 2018; Kusner et al. 2017), which have been referred to as “de-facto standard in explainable ar-tificial intelligence” (Sokol and Flach 2019). The basic con-cept of CEs is to provide explanation to the “why” question: 

why does the model return this decision in this situation ?CEs propose modifications to the input data that would incur a different decision by the model (Verma et al. 2024). Thus, CEs relate to singular decisions rather than global approxi-mation of a complex model, and may provide an explanation by contrast rather than by local approximation as done by other techniques such as local explanations (Ribeiro, Singh, and Guestrin 2016). CE is both attractive and flexible, see-ing usage beyond the abstract opening of the “black box”, such as in model debugging (Abid, Yuksekgonul, and Zou 2022), and the provision of justification and recourse for al-gorithmic decisions (Karimi, Sch¨ olkopf, and Valera 2021; Wachter, Mittelstadt, and Russell 2018). Our contribution is motivated by critical research on CE and its limits in the aforementioned tasks. Though we ac-knowledge the potential of CEs, we are interested in gaug-ing the extent to which they can reliably support justifi-cation, contestation, and reversal of decisions across real-world decision-making settings. Specifically, we believe that assessing CEs’ sensitivity to expectable circumstantial vari-ation is crucial for determining whether CE can robustly re-alize values central to practices of public justification and recourse mechanisms, such as agency, trust, and account-ability. For example, adequate recourse mechanisms will en-able contestation, appeal, and reversal across a range of cir-cumstances rather than only under narrowly specified condi-tions (Venkatasubramanian and Alfano 2020). It is therefore crucial to assess whether CEs can deliver stable and mean-ingful recourse under variation characteristic to real-world decision-making settings. Our paper provides both empirical and theoretical con-tributions. While prior research has explored the robustness of CEs under minor changes in the data, model, and gen-arXiv:2608.30956v1 [cs.CY] 31 Aug 2026 eration method (Virgolin and Fracaros 2022; Slack et al. 2021; Brughmans, Leyman, and Martens 2024), we mea-sure the sensitivity of CEs under systematic “upstream in-terventions” affecting the pipeline that starts from data col-lection, goes through model selection and fitting, and finally ends in the generation of CEs. Specifically, we start from ex-plicitly modeling certain choices usually made on the “busi-ness side” of the ML pipeline as interventions on a structural causal model (SCM) representing the pipeline itself, such as the observation model of features, the labeling mechanism and the metric employed to operationalize the fitness of a model. For simplicity, we refer to these choices collectively as upstream choices which produce different specifications of the SCM and, by extension, models. We find that upstream interventions can dramatically af-fect the CEs generated downstream, producing differences comparable in magnitude to those observed when the ex-planation method itself is changed (Brughmans, Leyman, and Martens 2024). Drawing on these findings, we substan-tiate the theoretical claim that several assumptions need to hold—in both an empirical and normative sense—for CEs to represent adequate “whys” in many real-life cases. Up-stream interventions represent meaningful, non-neutral, and potentially contestable choices made by model providers or decision-makers. However, they remain unaccounted for when CEs are presented as evidence to justify models or particular outputs or as recommendations for decision re-versal. We argue that taking the “whys” seriously requires, besides mere explainability, broader transparency about up-stream assumptions and choices, accordingly, and recogniz-ing model providers and deployers as parties whose choices and policies require justification and potential revision. 

# Background and Related Work 

The concepts explainability and interpretability, often used interchangeably, have received significant attention in the ML literature (Lipton 2018). Broadly, explainability refers to the “the ability to explain or to present [the algorithm’s prediction logic] in understandable terms to a human” (Doshi-Velez and Kim 2017, p.2), whereas interpretability refers more specifically to “the degree to which an observer can understand the cause of a decision” (Miller 2019, p.8) (see also Biran and Cotton (2017)). Technical approaches in these areas, which we describe below, pursue a range of overlapping but conceptually distinct aims. Examples in-clude debugging, evaluating, and monitoring ML system performance; enabling decision-makers to explain and jus-tify decisions to decision-subjects; ensuring that subjects and oversight bodies can understand, contest, trust those de-cisions; and providing subjects with actionable means of recourse in case of incorrect or unfavorable decisions (Di-akopoulos 2025; Verma et al. 2024). These concerns are re-flected in existing regulations and literature on the so-called right to explanation (Juliussen 2025). Article 22 of the Gen-eral Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) states that “[t]he controller shall provide the data subject with [...] meaningful information about the logic involved, as well as the signif-icance and the envisaged consequences of such processing for the data subject” (European Parliament and Council of the European Union 2016, Art. 21). In addition, article 86 of the AI act states that, with some exceptions, “[a]ny affected person subject to a decision which is taken by the deployer on the basis of the output from a high-risk AI system” as classified in the AI act (European Parliament and Council 2024, Art. 86) “shall have the right to obtain from the de-ployer clear and meaningful explanations of the role of the AI system in the decision-making procedure and the main elements of the decision taken”. Technical solutions to these ends may be grouped roughly into two categories. First, global explanation methods seek to approximate a complex model in its entirety by identify-ing important input variables, for example, or by providing visual summaries (Lundberg and Lee 2017). Examples of global techniques include ones for computing feature im-portance and dependency plots. Second, local explanation methods aim to explain individual decisions, either by ap-proximating the model’s decision surface (i.e., a boundary or the regression hyperplane) in a region close to the de-cision point or by providing an alternative scenario where the model’s decision would be different. Local approxima-tion tools such as LIME fall into the former class (Ribeiro, Singh, and Guestrin 2016), while CEs, which comprise our focus, fall under the latter. A further alternative worth men-tioning is to employ statistical models which are transpar-ent “off-the-shelf” whenever possible, as proposed by Rudin (2019). Nonetheless, so-called “post-hoc” explainability has remained a central topic in AI research for over a decade (Guidotti et al. 2018). 

## Counterfactual Explanations (CE) 

This paper focuses on counterfactual explanation (CE), a class of local explanations that describe how a prediction model’s prediction (e.g., a classification or a ranking) would change given a change in the input (Verma et al. 2024). In plain terms, CE answers “why” questions by computing “what ifs”, namely, by identifying and specifying minimal changes in input that would flip the output. How much job experience should a rejected job applicant have had in or-der to get hired? Would a change in an applicant’s salary have made a difference to their credit score? CEs are versa-tile and relatively easy to implement as they do not require opening “black box” models (Wachter, Mittelstadt, and Rus-sell 2018). They have become the “de facto standard in ex-plainable artificial intelligence” (Sokol and Flach 2019, p.2), accordingly. Subsequent sections discuss its numerous use-applications ranging from model debugging (Abid, Yuksek-gonul, and Zou 2022) and model evaluation and justification (e.g., Goethals, Martens, and Calders (2023); Wang et al. (2024); see also Kusner et al. (2017)) to the provision of re-course (Wachter, Mittelstadt, and Russell 2018; Verma et al. 2024). Formally, a counterfactual explanation x′ is an alternative input instance x, x ′ ∈ X which induces a different deci-sion from a decision model F . Usually, the counterfactual instance x′ should be taken to be as similar as possible to 

x; sometimes, it is constrained to be an actual instance from the collected dataset D = {xi, y i}n. Finding counterfactu-als can then be operationalized as an optimization problem, of which various variants exist. For expository purposes, we consider the following problem: 

arg min X′ L(F (X), F (X′)) + λ · d(X, X ′) (1) where L is a loss (or cost) function modelling the similar-ity between F (x) and F (x′), which should be minimized under the constraint that F (x)̸ = F (x′); and d(x, x ′) is a dissimilarity function computed directly on the instances (for instance, a norm defined in X m where m is the number of features available for each data point). Finally, λ is a pa-rameter available to the method user to balance out the two objectives. Methodologies for obtaining CEs differ in their under-lying optimization techniques and their concern. Advance-ment in CE research and evaluation of methodologies may be performed over different dimensions and under various concerns. We summarize here four key concerns central to our present discussion. We refer readers interested in an ex-haustive list of evaluation criteria to the surveys by Verma et al. (2024) and Bayrak and Bach (2024): • Validity: a counterfactual explanation is considered valid if the counterfactual x′ is predicted by the model f in a way considered desirable for counterfactual reason-ing. As an example, if a user is wondering why their re-sum´ e was not selected after screening – that is, say, y =

f (x) = 0 , in the counterfactual explanation, y′ = f (x′)

should be equal to 1. That is, when considering f as a classifier, counterfactual explanations need to cross the decision boundary. • Minimality: a minimal counterfactual explanation x′ is as close as possible to the explanandum x. This property is sometimes referred to as sparsity, which implies the minimization of the L1-norm |x′ − x|1 and mandates ad-ditionally that the least number of entries are changed. An appropriate norm choice is usually dependent on the feature types available. • Actionability: a counterfactual explanation is consid-ered actionable if it does not include immutable, sensitive or otherwise hard-to-modify characteristics of the input data. Operationally, this may be implemented by a set of no-go features |A| ≤ m which should not be included in the counterfactual explanation. The choice of A may also be related to fairness concerns, broadly intended. As an example, under the constraint of actionability, an ex-planation in the resume’ screening classification should not include their gender or age. Under a cost-sensitive relaxation of actionability, it may be considered more ac-tionable to suggest gaining some professional certifica-tion relevant to the job position rather than enrolling in a multi-year education program. • Robustness: a counterfactual explanation is considered robust if it remains valid under small perturbations to the model or its underlying data. Fokkema, de Heide, and Philips (2022) show that naive counterfactual methods applied to ensemble models can have validity below 50% after model retraining, and that requiring higher predic-tion confidence for the counterfactual class mitigates this issue at the cost of increased distance from the original instance. 

## Algorithmic Recourse (AR) 

This paper discusses CE specifically in connection to algo-rithmic recourse (AR). Commonplace definitions of AR in-clude “an actionable set of changes a person can undertake in order to improve their outcome” (Joshi et al. 2019, p.1), “the ability of a person to obtain a desired outcome from a fixed model” (Ustun, Spangher, and Liu 2019, p.10), and “the systematic process of reversing unfavorable decisions by algorithms and bureaucracies across a range of counter-factual scenarios” (Venkatasubramanian and Alfano 2020, p.284). Existing literature covers roughly two types of sce-narios in which AR is typically sought. First, a decision sub-ject may seek recourse for decisions that are correct yet un-favorable (e.g., a job applicant is rejected but wants to reap-ply in the future). Here, recourse might entail a specification of “actions that the agent would need to undertake to re-ceive a more favorable decision from the algorithm” in the future (Venkatasubramanian and Alfano 2020, p.288). Sec-ond, a decision subject may seek recourse for decisions that are unfavorable but also incorrect (e.g., the job applicant is rejected on the basis of erroneous or incomplete data). Here, recourse could entail reversing the decision and, depending on the case, possibly retraining the algorithm or changing or supplementing its input data (Cerrato, Vallenas Coronel, and K¨ oppel 2023). Recourse is generally understood to facilitate values like 

personal autonomy and social trust : when people (know that they) can reverse unfavorable decisions if needed, they can exercise their agency and plan for the future (Venkatasub-ramanian and Alfano 2020). Our paper adopts the notion of AR as a modally robust good advanced by Venkatasubrama-nian and Alfano (2020) who appeal to Pettit’s view accord-ing to which a good is modally robust if it remains valuable across possible worlds (Pettit 2015). Recourse is valuable in a wide range range of possible situations and counterfac-tual circumstances, but arguably especially so in nonideal circumstances where decisions can be erroneous or norma-tively unfounded (e.g., unfair or arbitrary). Intuitively, the existence of effective mechanisms for appealing, contesting, and reversing decisions is particularly crucial for decision subjects where decision-makers may err or enact morally problematic decision policies. CE is widely regarded as a promising means of provid-ing recourse to decision subjects (Wachter, Mittelstadt, and Russell 2018; Verma et al. 2024). As explanations, CEs help decision subjects understand the reasons behind the deci-sions they receive, enabling them to also appeal and contest those decisions where needed. They can also highlight how the subject could receive a favorable decision in the future. Here, an actionable and minimal CE can be thought of as a recommendation that highlights a feasible set of actions the subject should undertake to receive a different (favor-able) decision from the model at a later time. Relatedly, CE is seen as a promising approach to implementing the con-tentious right to explanation (e.g., Wachter, Mittelstadt, and Russell (2018)): ideally, they will express in an understand-able format what features about the individual should have changed for the decision to change: “had you done A instead of B, you would have received a favorable outcome”. The idea that CEs should facilitate recourse reliably in differ-ent circumstances appears to also motivate recent research that has developed methods to ensure that CEs remain ro-bust to changes in the data (Dominguez-Olmedo, Karimi, and Sch¨ olkopf 2022) and the model (Upadhyay, Joshi, and Lakkaraju 2021). Ensuring the technical robustness of CEs remains crucial in light of our findings. However, our results also demonstrate the need to attend to broader circumstantial variation—particularly, variation in upstream design choices and ML pipelines—to ensure that recourse mechanisms re-liably facilitate their guiding values. 

## Counterfactual Explanations for Algorithmic Recourse: Challenges and Limitations 

Our experiments are motivated by critical research exam-ining the assumptions, challenges, and limitations of exist-ing approaches to CE and AR. One key challenge for CE concerns the so-called “Rashomon effect” (Breiman 2001): typically multiple non-identical counterfactuals can be com-puted even for a fixed model and output, and these may differ with respect to their validity and minimality. Slack et al. (2021) find that popular CE methods are also vulner-able to manipulation, lacking robustness against minor per-turbations in the model. Brughmans, Leyman, and Martens (2024) test 12 different methods for CE and find high lev-els of disagreement between their respective explanations, suggesting that a particular counterfactual does not cap-ture all relevant information and instead represents a par-tial and “unique point of view on the involved prediction logic” (p. 455). The idea that CE provides a restricted “view from somewhere” aligns with critical studies emphasizing that CEs are colored by ontological, epistemic, semantic, normative and empirical assumptions. For example, Baro-cas, Selbst, and Raghavan (2020) and Kasirzadeh and Smart (2021) observe how CEs can be premised on contestable and empirically questionable assumptions pertaining to the re-lationship between model features and real-world actions, the commensurability and manipulability of features high-lighted in counterfactuals, and the similarity between actual and counterfactual scenarios. Our empirical findings rein-force these critiques, demonstrating that CEs are sensitive to upstream assumptions and choices conditioning the gener-ated counterfactuals. Previously identified limitations of existing AR ap-proaches represent form a second motivation for our study. Existing work highlights that standard AR frameworks adopt an individualistic and static perspective to recourse (Venkatasubramanian and Alfano 2020; Upadhyay, Joshi, and Lakkaraju 2021; De Toni et al. 2025). On the one hand, prevailing approaches tend to place responsibility for contesting and reversing decisions on the decision subject. This idea that “recourse for a person is necessarily recourse 

by them” overlooks that recourse for the affected individ-ual can require involving caretakers or legal representatives (Venkatasubramanian and Alfano 2020, p.288). On the other hand, standard AR approaches tend to neglect temporal dy-namics and instabilities, missing how updates to datasets and models, and changes in the underlying causal structure, can undermine the actionability and validity of recourse recom-mendations (Upadhyay, Joshi, and Lakkaraju 2021; De Toni et al. 2025). Actions that suffice for obtaining favorable out-comes at time t may fail to achieve the same effect at t+1, indicating that current approaches to AR fail to reliably fa-cilitate decision reversal across changing circumstances. The challenges and limitations discussed above intersect most clearly where CEs are used as a basis for recourse. For example, Slack et al. (2021, p.10) note that the manipula-bility of CEs via minor data perturbations “bring[s] into the question the trustworthiness of counterfactual explanations as a tool to recommend recourse to algorithm stakehold-ers”. Similar concerns arise from changes due to distribution shifts and model updates as non-robust CEs may provide subjects seeking recourse with false hope of reversing their decision. These issues also problematize approaches to AR which view the decision subject as the locus of responsibility and the decision-maker as a “benevolent paternalist” recom-mending what the subject should do. Indeed, while research has developed promising methods to generate robust coun-terfactuals (Slack et al. 2021; De Toni et al. 2025; Upadhyay, Joshi, and Lakkaraju 2021), recourse recommendations that are invariant to changes in data and models do not avoid the problems stemming from this framing. Especially given the contentious nature of assumptions preceding the gener-ation of CEs, their potential misalignment with real-world facts, and potential disagreement between multiple CEs for the same output, it appears further critical scrutiny of “up-stream” factors and choices is warranted. To this end, we analyze how upstream interventions at various stages of the ML pipeline affect CEs. 

# Example: Resume Screening 

We begin by introducing a running application example used throughout the remainder of this paper. We investigate can-didate and resum´ e screening as a step of the hiring pro-cess which companies have an interest in automating (Sinha, Akhtar, and Kumar 2020; Lo et al. 2025) and which has been previously investigated critically in the literature due to its reliance on unvalidated psychometric measurements (Rhea et al. 2022). Commercial applications for screening we have reviewed appear to focus on computation of “fitness scores” of candidates to specific job positions, with a heavy emphasis on NLP and LLMs to generate both scores and ostensive explanations for these (PrescreenAI 2025). Some companies even propose automated interviews according to scripts that can be given by domain experts and HR pro-fessionals (Alex.com 2025). In recent academic work, Lo et al. (2025) propose the extraction and computation of five separate scores via LLM-based information extraction from resumes, dealing with i) self-evaluation of the candidate ii) job-relevant skills iii) previous work experience, iv) basic information and v) educational background, which can then be combined and employed to sort candidates. We design a hypothetical task of resume’ screening with the objective of adhering as much as possible to the char-acteristics of the tools and methodologies currently inves-tigated and developed in this application context. However, we step back from LLM and RAG-based methodologies (Lo et al. 2025) as far as they are employed for candidate scor-ing directly. Our main interest is the production of CEs for screening decisions, and the production of counterfactuals in LLMs is not particularly mature and appears to suffer from issues of counterfactual validity (Youssef et al. 2024) in the sense discussed earlier in this paper. Instead, we operational-ize the problem of resum´ e screening as one of supervised score-based ranking (Zehlike, Yang, and Stoyanovich 2022). We assume that a dataset D = {(xi, y i)}ni=1 ⊂ X m × Y is given. Here, X m represents a series of m characteristics of individuals extracted from CVs such as previous job experi-ence and education, whereas Y is the label space. We assume that an underlying, continuous fit construct y∗ ∈ [0 , 1] ex-ists, representing the probability score that a recruiter would, in principle, assess a candidate as the best one, and that the recorded labels yi are produced from it by an explicit busi-ness rule, so that the practical screening outcome is binary. Then, we define F : X → Y as a decision model trained on dataset D so to predict the potential fit of new unseen applicants which could be interviewed or not depending on the prediction of F . We then assume that individuals that are screened do not have access to F but rather to a counterfac-tual explanation ˆx = C(F, x ). Compared to usual formaliza-tions of ranking, we do not explicitly represent a query q as a feature vector and assume instead that the firm responsible to produce the model F has a way to produce datasets Dq rele-vant to the specific query at hand. To clarify, imagine that the company implementing the resume’ screening service offers it to screen candidates for various positions, responsibilities, and competences. The modeling approach usually adopted in the Information Retrieval literature here would be to rep-resent a specific position to be filled as a query q and as-sume that the model F may take a vector representation of q

as an input. Here, we instead assume that depending on the position of interest, a relevant supervised dataset D is con-structed which is then employed to fit the model F . Thus, the good being distributed here by model F is admittance to further interviewing, whether AI-based (Alex.com 2025) or not, which we deem here a binary outcome and a poten-tial target for a “why” question from candidates that have not been selected. Thus, F may also be analyzed as a binary classifier wherever relevant or useful. We give the causal graph representing the assumed data generating process in Figure 1. The features X and labels 

Y in D depend on measurement models ϕX and ϕY which are non-observable by the candidates and only implicitly de-fined by the model-producing firm. Before introducing the structural equations we fix nota-tion. We use uppercase X, Y for the random variables cor-responding to the SCM nodes, and lowercase xi, y i for their realizations in the dataset; their value spaces are X m and 

Y respectively, so xi ∈ X m and yi ∈ Y. The dataset 

D = {(xi, y i)}ni=1 is then an i.i.d. sample from the joint distribution that the SCM induces on (X, Y ). The recorded label is the post-business-rule label Y , not the latent fit con-struct Y ∗: only the projection Y = fY (Y ∗, ϕ Y ) is ever ob-servable, which is precisely why ϕY is one of the design choices we will intervene on. The same logic applies to X:the recorded feature vector is the output of the measurement model ϕX applied to the unobservable world W , and ϕX

is similarly an explicit design choice rather than a fact of the world. How exactly these measurement models are op-erationalized has a downstream causal effect on the trained model F , which we make explicit in the structural equations of the SCM in Figure 1: 

W := NW (2) 

X := fX (W, ϕ X , N X ) (3) 

Y ∗ := fY ∗ (W, N Y ∗ ) (4) 

Y := fY (Y ∗, ϕ Y ) (5) 

F := fF (X, Y, M, C, K, N F ) (6) 

ˆY := F (X) (7) 

ˆX := f ˆX (X, ˆY , F, τ, N ˆX ) (8) We use F throughout for the trained model itself, and reserve fF for the training procedure that maps 

(X, Y, M, C, K, N F ) to F ; similarly fX , f ˆX , f Y , f Y ∗ de-note the structural functions producing the corresponding nodes. To describe the process, we assume that the features 

X and raw labels Y ∗ are measured noisily from the state of the world W . This may be understood as the process of ob-taining certain measurements of skill, experience and fit for the position; we will be more concrete about the data setup in the Experiments section. We note that here we assume that the raw labels may be post-processed into Y due to business requirements such as salary caps. The model training stage is represented by fF and we assume it to be causally influ-enced by a metric of success M , a model selection strategy 

C and K the model family or families being considered. The trained model F then induces ranking labels ˆY which are used to generate counterfactuals ˆX via the generation func-tion f ˆX . While counterfactual generation strategies have a plethora of hyperparameters, we focus here on τ , the prob-ability threshold that should be crossed by F for a counter-factual ˆx to be considered. In our experiments, we consider both most-minimal and most-valid counterfactuals by vary-ing the threshold τ .

# Experiments 

Data Sources. The screening application described in the prior section motivates our choice of variables, but, as pre-viously discussed, our experiments are not based on textual resumes. We use the American Community Survey (ACS) microdata sample obtained via the folktables library, treating each respondent as a candidate. The ACS gives us actual population-level data for X, that is, the demographic, occupational and educational features that a screening firm would, on real resumes, have to reconstruct via parsing or LLM-based extraction. The latent fit construct Y ∗ is how-ever not so easily accessed: no public dataset that we are aware of connects features of this kind to recruiter judg-ments, and we have no easy way to bridge that gap. We therefore approximate Y ∗ by an observed market signal: Figure 1: The structural causal model representing the data generating process. We assume that the world W is not observable, but that features X and labels Y may be obtained via measurement models. The trained model F similarly depends on certain design choices and produces labels ˆY . The counterfactual examples ˆX will ultimately depend on the interventions made by the developers regarding the SCM pictured here. We report structural equations and other variables in Equation 2. earnings, on the reading that wages reflect, imperfectly, the labour market’s valuation of the same features that a screen-ing model would weigh. In terms of the features X, we take a total of seven columns, with two continuous features and five discrete ones. The features contain diverse information, ranging from the type of college degree obtained (if any) to the number of working hours per week. We report the com-plete variable definitions in Table 1 in the Appendix, due to space constraints. 

Experimental Design. Our experimental setup is centered around the comparison of CE sets generated as a result of an intervention on the causal graph of Figure 1 which we take to represent a ML pipeline. Thus, we are interested in observing whether upstream interventions on the SCM, for instance intervening on the feature definitions and labeling mechanisms, create significant variation on the generated CE sets. To understand whether a variation is significant, we take a comparison with a downstream intervention on the same graph, that is, a change of the validity threshold τ . At a basic level, this value can be set at τ = 0 .51 to ensure that the trained model F is confident “just enough” that a certain change in the feature values of an individual, resulting in the explanation or recommendation ˆX, will change its output ˆY .We then vary τ to higher values, and treat this downstream intervention as our baseline: if upstream design decisions produce comparable or larger effects than directly tuning the explanation method, this suggests that practitioners should attend to these decisions more carefully, and that such deci-sions should also be considered as possible answers to the “Why was this user not selected for screening?” question. Specifically, we analyze the effect of the following interven-tions: • Intervention 1: Label definition (do (ϕY = s) for s ∈{40 k, 50 k, 60 k, 70 k, 80 k}). We vary the salary cap pa-rameter that determines which individuals are labeled as positive. Specifically, we define Y = 1 if an individual is both in the top 10% of earners and earns below the salary cap. This simulates a business constraint where the orga-nization cannot afford candidates above a certain salary threshold. • Intervention 2: Feature measurement (do (ϕX = p) for 

p ∈ {for-profit , all-private , private-self , non-gov }). We vary the definition of “private sector worker” by includ-ing different combinations of employment classes: (i) private for-profit only, (ii) all private employers (for-profit and non-profit), (iii) private plus self-employed, and (iv) all non-government. This reflects ambiguity in how categorical concepts are operationalized from raw survey data. • Intervention 3: Success metric (do (M = m) for m ∈{accuracy , ROC-AUC , NDCG@100 , precision , recall , F1 }). We vary the metric used for model selection during cross-validation. This reflects choices made by ML practitioners when optimizing model performance. • Intervention 4: Validation strategy (do (C = c) for 

c ∈ {holdout , 5-fold , 10-fold }). We vary the selec-tion strategy for validation of the model F from sim-ple holdout (a 15% test split followed by a 20% validation split of the remainder, i.e. approximately 68/17/15 train/validation/test) to 5-fold and 10-fold cross-validation. Both this intervention and the preceding one tune the hyperparameters of a random forest classi-fier over a small grid that we report in the Appendix. • Intervention 5: Stopping threshold (do (τ = t) for t ∈{0.51 , 0.55 , 0.60 , 0.65 , 0.70 }). We vary the confidence threshold used by the counterfactual generation algo-rithm 1. This serves as our baseline for comparison with the upstream interventions. We operationalize the “impact of an intervention” by mea-suring the sensitivity of counterfactuals across the separate causal graphs resulting from the intervention at hand: 

Definition (Explanation Sensitivity). Let S be astructural causal model with design parameters ξ =(ϕX , ϕ Y , M, C, K, τ ). For a query instance x with predic-tion ˆy = F (x), let ˆXξ = C(F, x, τ ) denote the set of counterfactual explanations generated under parameters ξ.The explanation sensitivity with respect to an intervention do (ξi = ξ′

> i

) on a single parameter ξi, holding all other pa-

> 1This is available as a parameter in DICE-kdtree, but not in NICE. For NICE, we simply reject CEs that are below the confi-dence.

rameters fixed, is: 

S(ξi, ξ ′

> i

) = Ex

h

d( ˆXξ , ˆXξ′ )

i

(9) where ξ′ differs from ξ only in component i, d is a dis-tance metric between CE sets on the feature space, and the expectation is taken over query instances x for which the model gave a negative prediction ˆy = 0. In our ex-periments, we compute explanation sensitivity over sets of CEs generated by DiCE-kdtree (Mothilal, Sharma, and Tan 2020) and NICE (Brughmans, Leyman, and Martens 2024). Both methods are retrieval-based : a counterfactual is selected from the training set rather than constructed by gradient-based optimization of a counterfactual loss. We ex-clude optimization-based methods deliberately, as we ob-served in pilot experiments that their seed-to-seed variability swamped the effect of both upstream and downstream inter-ventions. We define the set distance d( ˆXξ , ˆXξ′ ) as a symmet-ric mean-of-nearest-neighbors distance, on which we fur-ther perform some rescaling to account for the differ-ent ranges of the features we employ. Continuous fea-tures are rescaled by their training-set median absolute deviation and categorical features contribute a 0/1 mis-match indicator. Full definitions are given in the Appendix. Lastly, we note that the “default setting” of the SCM is 

ξ0 = ( ϕpriv  

> X

, ϕ 60 kY , M acc , C 5, K RF , τ 0.51 ): “private sector” re-stricted to private for-profit employment, a salary cap of 

$60 k, accuracy as the model selection metric, 5-fold cross-validated grid search, a random-forest hypothesis class, τ =0.51 .

Research Questions. Our research questions are the fol-lowing: • RQ1 (Sensitivity). Are counterfactual explanations more 

sensitive to upstream interventions on the SCM than to the downstream τ intervention? • RQ2 (Consistency). Do upstream interventions produce more disagreement between explanations than τ does? 

## RQ1: Mechanism Sensitivity to the Four Interventions 

We report the five sensitivity interventions together in Fig-ure 2. Each panel shows, for one intervention, the mean symmetric set-distance between the strict counterfactual sets generated under the baseline level and each alternative level of that intervention, separately for DiCE-kdtree (circles) and NICE (triangles), with 95% Student-t CIs over ten seeds. The shaded band on each panel is the sensitivity of the gen-erated CEs when intervening on τ , where we take the maxi-mum sensitivity we observed over τ interventions. A method whose marker sits outside this band has been moved more by the upstream intervention than it would have been by chang-ing the validity threshold; a marker inside the band has been moved by an amount the threshold could already account for. Three of the four interventions move both methods clearly outside the τ band. In the salary-cap experiment (Figure 2, top left) sensitivity grows monotonically with the distance from the $40k baseline, with caps at $70k and $80k pro-ducing distances well above the band for both methods. We take this to indicate that business requirements such as salary cap are also viable answers to a “why” question. The same pattern holds for the operationalization of private-sector worker (Figure 2, top right): all three alternatives to the for-profit-only definition DICE-kdtree outside the band, while NICE displays comparable or higher sensitivity across three settings, but within-band. The success-metric experi-ment (Figure 2, bottom-left) is the most extreme of the four: switching from accuracy-based model selection to recall, ROC-AUC, NDCG@100, or F1 produces sensitivities that exceed the τ . The only metric whose explanations remain in-side the band is precision, which on this pipeline selects clas-sifiers that overlap heavily with the accuracy-optimal model. The cross-validation experiment (Figure 2, bottom right) is the only case in which the upstream intervention does not dominate the τ hyperparameter: moving from a held-out train/val/test split to 5- or 10-fold cross-validation produces sensitivities that overlap with the τ band for both methods. This upstream intervention has therefore a comparable effect on the generated CEs as the downstream intervention on the generating method itself. Taken together, Figure 2 answers 

RQ1 . The choice of label definition ( ϕY ), feature measure-ment ( ϕX ), and model-selection criterion ( M ) typically per-turbs the explanation more than the explanation procedure’s own validity threshold, while the choice of cross-validation strategy ( C) is roughly comparable. This phenomenon holds across both retrieval-based CE methods. 

## RQ2: Consistency of Explanations 

The sensitivity analysis quantifies how far the CE set moves on average; a complementary question, addressing RQ2 , is whether upstream interventions also produce more counter-factual disagreement than τ does. We follow (Brughmans, Melis, and Martens 2024) on the set of features each CE changes relative to the query and report three per-query agreement scores: their Jaccard agreement (do the same features change?), plus two extensions: Sign Agreement on shared continuous features (same direction of change?) and 

Value Agreement on shared categorical features (same new value?). We report formal definitions and aggregation across multi-CE sets in the Appendix. For each experiment, seed, and query instance x with ˆy = 0 , we compute the three scores between the CE sets ˆXξ (x) and ˆXξ′ (x) for every pair of intervention levels (ξ, ξ ′), holding all other parameters at the default setting ξ0. We then average per-query scores and report them in Figure 3 as means with 95% Student-t confi-dence intervals over the ten seeds. For three of four experiments, we observe DiCE-kdtree’s mean Value Agreement drops from 0.39 across different val-ues of τ to between 0.18 and 0.26 under upstream interven-tions; NICE shows the same direction (from 1.00 to between 

0.61 and 0.87 ). The Jaccard agreement is also slightly lower for upstream interventions, while Sign Agreement is roughly equal both in downstream and upstream interventions. The CV-folds panel (model selection, top right) is the exception, with upstream and τ at comparable agreement, which is con-sistent with the sensitivity result presented in the previous Figure 2: Mechanism sensitivity of counterfactual explanations to each of the five interventions on the SCM of Figure 1. We show the effefct of intervening on the CE generating method ( τ ) as a baseline (colored shaded band). Markers outside the band indicate that the upstream intervention perturbs the explanation more than the explanation procedure’s own validity threshold. 

Figure 3: Within-method agreement under upstream inter-ventions (top two rows of each panel) vs. the downstream 

τ baseline (bottom two rows). DiCE-kdtree in blue, NICE in orange. Markers are means with 95% Student-t CIs over per-query scores; metrics are Jaccard ( ◦), Sign Agreement on continuous features ( △), Value Agreement on categori-cal features ( □). Higher values indicate more agreement; an upstream marker to the left of its τ counterpart means the upstream intervention produced more disagreement than τ

does. section. Our conclusion with regard to RQ2 , is that upstream interventions may also impact the consistency of the expla-nation at the same level or slightly higher than intervening on τ .

# Discussion 

Summarizing our results, we find that upstream interven-tions have a significant effect on the resulting counterfactu-als. Our operationalization of the sensitivity of CEs to inter-ventions reveals that this effect is larger when compared to changing the validity threshold τ of the method, something that we observe in two separate retrieval-based CE gener-ators ( RQ1 ). Compared to recent work from Brughmans, Melis, and Martens (2024), we show that disagreement in counterfactual explanations may also stem from upstream interventions ( RQ2 ). We note here that we do not report this result intending to demonstrate a limitation of CEs per se : compared to previ-ous work (such as e.g. Slack et al. (2021)) we do not neces-sarily criticize the (lack of) robustness and manipulability of CEs to the upstream interventions we designed. In fact, there exist methods to ameliorate the robustness of CEs to certain variations in the data and model (see e.g. Virgolin and Frac-aros (2022); Jiang et al. (2024)), and we have no reason to believe that they could not be extended to account for some of all the upstream interventions we analyze in this paper. Rather, our purpose with the quantitative evidence presented in the previous section is to substantiate our theoretical argu-ment that several assumptions need to hold for CEs to rep-resent an adequate “why”, especially in applications such as justification and recourse. The central assumption that we have operationalized with our experiments is the fixed model assumption, that is, that there is a specific model that best fits the data. While this may be the case, this is conditional on several actions from the decision-maker which are then 

not provided as the underlying reason for a certain decision having being reached. However, we have shown that certain decision-maker choices such as the model success metric, the labeling mechanism and the measurement model for cer-tain features have significant impact on the generated CEs. We now turn to the implications of our findings for real-life applications of CE, where they direct attention to the reasonableness of the fixed model assumption. Is the model stable over time? Is it legitimate in the sense that it is based on justifiable assumptions and design choices? The fixed model assumption can be assumed to be reasonable in some cases, where CE is used to explain outputs or debug mod-els. Our findings are less directly relevant for such cases, accordingly, as the examined upstream interventions alter the model and its outputs. However, in many real-world set-tings data-generating processes evolve and models are up-dated, meaning pipeline stability cannot be assumed. Our findings have implications for such cases. Debugging sig-nals produced with CE may fluctuate under upstream per-turbations, for example, highlighting the need to distinguish issues arising from stable properties of the model from those stemming from data processing, labeling, and other con-tingent upstream factors. The observed sensitivity of CEs also underscores that CEs depend on upstream assumptions and choices that often remain open to normative and em-pirical contestation (Barocas, Selbst, and Raghavan 2020; Kasirzadeh and Smart 2021). Intuitively, why a subject has received a particular decision depends not only on whether the subject meets certain criteria, but also on the deciding party’s choices that shape the criteria—for example, feature measurement, labeling, success metrics, and more. Our re-sults thus reinforce the idea that CEs are contestable arti-facts of ML pipeline configurations which may themselves require critical scrutiny, an idea we examine next in connec-tion to the provision of justification and recourse. In brief, we argue that CEs cannot reliably facilitate the guiding goals and values of these practices unless the legitimacy of up-stream assumptions and design choices has been established. 

## Implications for Justification 

The dependence of CEs on contestable upstream design and measurement choices has significant implications for their use in justifying models and outputs in decision-making and auditing contexts. In practice, where models—and, by ex-tension, assumptions and design choices shaping them— remain (or should remain) open to evaluation and revision, this dependence CEs marks a fundamental limit on their evi-dential and justificatory role. Because upstream choices also affect what counterfactuals are generated, CEs do not neces-sarily provide sufficient evidence for normative justification. Treating them as such inflates their evidential and justifica-tory role, and conflates conditional model behavior with ad-equate normative grounds for decisions. Meanwhile, it ob-fuscates agents’ responsibilities by precluding consideration of the possibility that the model provider or deployer should justify and potentially revise their underlying assumptions and upstream choices. Connecting to concerns of the manipulability of CEs (Slack et al. 2021), we note a related risk: CEs may be misin-terpreted as model-in dependent evidence or used selectively to shirk responsibility and public accountability. To illus-trate, consider a stylized example in which our hypothetical recruiter is suspected of indirect age discrimination, and the burden of proof has shifted onto them. To rebut the suspi-cion, the recruiter conducts a counterfactual fairness analy-sis by perturbing applicants’ age to measure differences in outcomes. Suppose the analysis shows quantitatively non-negligible age-based disparities. However, the recruiter ar-gues that they reflect age-correlated differences in qualifica-tions and skills, and that they are also proportional to those differences. This exemplifies the risk that CEs may be mis-interpreted as evidence of causality (Karimi, Sch¨ olkopf, and Valera 2021). But the recruiter’s CEs presuppose a causal structure over the data as opposed to providing evidence for a specific causal explanation of the disparities (e.g., that age causes differences in the screened features). The generated CEs cannot establish that the disparities are justified, accord-ingly, as supplementary evidence is required. The CEs may provide evidence of the disparities’ propor-tionality to base-rate differences, supporting the recruiter’s claim. Nonetheless, this remains insufficient for justification in the case at hand. The recruiter must also demonstrate that they have legitimate aim, and that the preferred model is necessary and appropriate for achieving that aim. Impor-tantly, however, this cannot be demonstrated under the as-sumption of a fixed model. Rather, comparison to reason-able alternatives is required, including but not limited to al-ternative models produced under different specifications of the SCM. This point is echoed in recent works stating that decision-makers have a legal duty to search for and imple-ment alternative models which exhibit comparable perfor-mance with less disparity (Black et al. 2024; Laufer, Ragha-van, and Barocas 2025). If CEs are to facilitate the required comparisons, they must notably be produced for multiple 

models trained on the same data. Our results show that, be-sides model selection, choices of labels and metrics can also affect CEs. Thus, they further underline the need to scru-tinize upstream assumptions and choices, and to assess the comparability, commensurability, and reliability of the com-pared CEs (Barocas, Selbst, and Raghavan 2020; Kasirzadeh and Smart 2021). 

## Implications for Recourse 

Our findings have significant implications for using CEs as a basis for recourse, lending support to critiques described in prior sections. On the one hand, they raise concerns about the (long-term) robustness and actionability of CEs 

qua recourse recommendations beyond concerns of data and model drift (Upadhyay, Joshi, and Lakkaraju 2021; De Toni et al. 2025). How decisions could be reversed depends not only on subjects’ features and the chosen decision threshold, but also on upstream elements of the ML pipeline. Accord-ingly, CEs produced under different assumptions and design choices are also likely to differ in properties such as mini-mality and actionability. Given the substantial changes ob-served under alternative feature measurements and model selection metrics, for instance, one can expect notable dif-ferences in the associated costs of achieving a favorable out-come. Where the stability of the ML pipeline is not guaran-teed, technical robustness under a fixed model fails to ensure that CEs facilitate the values that recourse should facilitate in a modally robust manner. Rather, if CEs are to reliably recommend feasible pathways to favorable outcomes under circumstantial variation, their robustness to upstream pertur-bations must be ensured. Our results call into questions whether recourse recom-mendations could also remain normatively underdetermined 

by standard evaluation criteria. If CEs for models produced under distinct but equally defensible upstream choices and assumptions describe incompatible recommendations for re-course (e.g., changing different features), then there may be no uniquely identifiable action the decision subject should have taken to achieve a favorable outcome. This possibil-ity underscores our previous point about the order of justifi-cation: upstream choices must be relatively settled, norma-tively speaking, prior to evaluating CEs for recourse. This also gives reason to expand the normative basis of evalu-ating recourse recommendations with additional desiderata such as fairness or diversity (Boxer and Neill 2025; Laugel et al. 2023). On the other hand, our findings also challenge the prevail-ing individualistic and unilateral framing of AR (Venkata-subramanian and Alfano 2020). Because CEs bracket up-stream assumptions, choices, and their consequences, they represent partial and incomplete answers to why a subject received the decision but also to how that decision could be reversed. This abstraction from the actions and responsibil-ities of model developers and/or deployers implicitly fore-closes consideration of the possibility that they ought to have acted otherwise, and that the normatively preferable path to favorable outcomes may be to revise the model or decision policy itself. In the language of modal robustness, CE as a recourse mechanism does not reliably facilitate trust or sub-jects’ autonomy across counterfactual cases where better de-sign and measurement choices could have been made ( ei-ther in the empirical or normative sense). Thus, where the model’s stability or normative justification remains unset-tled, CEs should not be taken at face value. Treating them as individualized advice for reversing decisions obscures their status as artifacts of organizations’ design and governance choices, and risks encouraging affected subjects to comply with potentially problematic policies. Taken together, these points highlight the need to move beyond the simplistic conception of AR as a unilateral pro-cess in which decision-makers benevolently recommend ac-tions to affected decision-subjects. They serve as an im-portant reminder that AR is an inherently relational prac-tice involving both decision subjects and decision-makers as parties whose behavior may require revision. In prac-tice, evaluating whether recourse mechanisms reliably fa-cilitates goods like personal autonomy and peace of mind requires considering all parties to the institutional rela-tion along with their respective possibilities and obligations for action. While design choices impact the CEs decision-subjects receive, it may be impossible for subjects to reverse their decisions through contesting such choices absent ap-propriate transparency. Beyond explainability, effective and robust recourse thus requires broader measures of “algo-rithmic transparency”—including but not limited to data-sharing structures and documentation trails (Gebru et al. 2021)—that enable critical scrutiny and informed appeal and contestation. The relational perspective also avoids insulat-ing the deciding party’s design choices from critical scrutiny without undermining individual responsibility. While it rec-ognizes that decision-subjects can exercise agency to alter their situation, it also does not unfairly place onto the sub-jects the burden of simply adapting to institutional discre-tion. 

# Conclusions 

In this paper, we provided an empirical and theoretical anal-ysis of the limits of CEs. Complementing existing work on their robustness, we measured the sensitivity of CEs to sys-tematic “upstream interventions” across the ML pipeline and showed that CEs generated with the same method vary sub-stantially in response to design choices made prior to the point of explanation. Our experiments illustrate that CEs track many factors in the ML pipeline which condition the model to which a CE method is applied. While our analy-sis focuses on a single CE method and metric (an extended version of Jaccard agreement), we expect similar patterns to hold more broadly. We encourage future research to test this with other local explanation methods (including alternative CE methods), alternative robustness measures, and recourse-relevant metrics such as diversity and actionability. Building on our findings and prior critical research on CE and AR, we argued that CE can play only a limited role in real-life practices of explanation, debugging, justification, and recourse provision. In particular, we argued that the po-tential temporal instability of key design choices, along with the contestability of their underlying assumptions, should in-form the evaluation and practical application of CE meth-ods. As model-dependent artifacts, CEs offer, at best, partial justification for models or decisions, and are prone to mis-interpretation and strategic misuse. Our findings also chal-lenge individualistic and unilateral understandings of AR. Recourse is relational and involves multiple parties, and thus effective recourse mechanisms must address the possibil-ity that organizations’ design choices may be empirically or normatively untenable and in need of critical scrutiny and potential revision. Therefore, CEs alone, absent broader “al-gorithmic transparency”, remain insufficient to secure core values like public accountability, trust, and agency. 

# Acknowledgements 

The authors gratefully acknowledge the support of the “TOPML: Trading Off Non-Functional Properties of Ma-chine Learning” project funded by the Carl Zeiss Founda-tion, grant number P2021-02-014. References 

Abid, A.; Yuksekgonul, M.; and Zou, J. 2022. Meaning-fully debugging model mistakes using conceptual counter-factual explanations. In International Conference on Ma-chine Learning , 66–88. PMLR. Alex.com. 2025. Alex.com — Automated AI Interviews. https://alex.com. Accessed: 2026-20-05. Barocas, S.; Selbst, A. D.; and Raghavan, M. 2020. The Hid-den Assumptions Behind Counterfactual Explanations and Principal Reasons. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency (FAT*) , 80– 89. Bayrak, B.; and Bach, K. 2024. Evaluation of Instance-Based Explanations: An In-Depth Analysis of Counterfac-tual Evaluation Metrics, Challenges, and the CEval Toolkit. 

IEEE Access , 12: 137683–137695. User cites as 2025. Biran, O.; and Cotton, C. 2017. Explanation and Justifica-tion in Machine Learning: A Survey. In IJCAI-17 Workshop on Explainable AI (XAI) , 8–13. Black, E.; Koepke, J. L.; Kim, P. T.; Barocas, S.; and Hsu, M. 2024. Less Discriminatory Algorithms. Georgetown Law Journal , 113(1): 53–115. Boxer, K. S.; and Neill, D. B. 2025. Realizing the Promises of Algorithmic Recourse through Reliability, Accessibility, and Fairness Principles. In Proceedings of the 5th ACM Con-ference on Equity and Access in Algorithms, Mechanisms, and Optimization , 218–240. Breiman, L. 2001. Statistical modeling: The two cultures (with comments and a rejoinder by the author). Statistical science , 16(3): 199–231. Brughmans, D.; Leyman, P.; and Martens, D. 2024. NICE: An Algorithm for Nearest Instance Counterfactual Explana-tions. Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery , 38(5): 2665– 2703. Brughmans, D.; Melis, L.; and Martens, D. 2024. Dis-agreement amongst counterfactual explanations: how trans-parency can be misleading. Top , 32(3): 429–462. Cerrato, M.; Vallenas Coronel, A.; and K¨ oppel, M. 2023. The Case for Correctability in Fair Machine Learning. In 

European Workshop on Algorithmic Fairness (EWAF’23) ,CEUR Workshop Proceedings. De Toni, G.; Teso, S.; Lepri, B.; and Passerini, A. 2025. Time Can Invalidate Algorithmic Recourse. In Proceedings of the 2025 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency (FAccT) . ArXiv:2410.08007. Diakopoulos, N. 2025. Prospective Algorithmic Account-ability and the Role of the News Media. In Noorman, M.; and Verdicchio, M., eds., Computer Ethics Across Disci-plines: Algorithmic Accountability and AI through Deborah G. Johnson’s Lens , 125–143. Springer. Preprint posted De-cember 2024. Dominguez-Olmedo, R.; Karimi, A.-H.; and Sch¨ olkopf, B. 2022. On the Adversarial Robustness of Causal Algorithmic Recourse. In Proceedings of the 39th International Confer-ence on Machine Learning (ICML) .Doshi-Velez, F.; and Kim, B. 2017. Towards a Rigorous Science of Interpretable Machine Learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1702.08608 .European Parliament and Council. 2024. Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (Artificial Intelligence Act). Accessed: March 2026. European Parliament and Council of the European Union. 2016. Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parlia-ment and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the Protection of Natural Persons with Regard to the Processing of Per-sonal Data and on the Free Movement of Such Data, and Re-pealing Directive 95/46/EC (General Data Protection Regu-lation). Fokkema, G.; de Heide, R.; and Philips, T. 2022. Don’t Explain Noise: Robust Counterfactuals for Randomized En-sembles. In Proceedings of the 39th International Confer-ence on Machine Learning .Gebru, T.; Morgenstern, J.; Vecchione, B.; Vaughan, J. W.; Wallach, H.; III, H. D.; and Crawford, K. 2021. Datasheets for datasets. Commun. ACM , 64(12): 86–92. Goethals, S.; Martens, D.; and Calders, T. 2023. PreCoF: Counterfactual Explanations for Fairness. Machine Learn-ing .Guidotti, R.; Monreale, A.; Ruggieri, S.; Turini, F.; Gian-notti, F.; and Pedreschi, D. 2018. A survey of methods for explaining black box models. ACM computing surveys (CSUR) , 51(5): 1–42. Jiang, J.; Leofante, F.; Rago, A.; and Toni, F. 2024. Robust Counterfactual Explanations in Machine Learning: A Sur-vey. In 33rd International Joint Conference on Artificial In-telligence, IJCAI 2024 , 8086–8094. International Joint Con-ferences on Artificial Intelligence Organization. Joshi, S.; Koyejo, O.; Vijitbenjaronk, W.; Kim, B.; and Ghosh, J. 2019. REVISE: Towards Realistic Individual Re-course and Actionable Explanations in Black-Box Decision Making Systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.09615 .Juliussen, B. A. 2025. The Right to an Explanation Under the GDPR and the AI Act. In MultiMedia Modeling (MMM 2025) , volume 15523 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science ,184–197. Springer. Karimi, A.-H.; Sch¨ olkopf, B.; and Valera, I. 2021. Algo-rithmic recourse: from counterfactual explanations to inter-ventions. In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM conference on fairness, accountability, and transparency , 353–362. Kasirzadeh, A.; and Smart, A. 2021. The Use and Misuse of Counterfactuals in Ethical Machine Learning. In Proceed-ings of the 2021 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountabil-ity, and Transparency (FAccT) , 228–236. Kusner, M. J.; Loftus, J.; Russell, C.; and Silva, R. 2017. Counterfactual Fairness. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 30, 4067–4077. Laufer, B.; Raghavan, M.; and Barocas, S. 2025. What Con-stitutes a Less Discriminatory Algorithm? In Proceedings of the 2025 Symposium on Computer Science and Law , 136– 151. Laugel, T.; Jeyasothy, A.; Lesot, M.-J.; Marsala, C.; and De-tyniecki, M. 2023. Achieving diversity in counterfactual explanations: a review and discussion. In Proceedings of the 2023 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency , 1859–1869. Lipton, Z. C. 2018. The mythos of model interpretability: In machine learning, the concept of interpretability is both important and slippery. Queue , 16(3): 31–57. Lo, F. P.-W.; Qiu, J.; Wang, Z.; Yu, H.; Chen, Y.; Zhang, G.; and Lo, B. 2025. AI Hiring with LLMs: A Context-Aware and Explainable Multi-Agent Framework for Resume Screening. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.02870 .Lundberg, S. M.; and Lee, S.-I. 2017. A unified approach to interpreting model predictions. Advances in neural infor-mation processing systems , 30. Meijer, A. 2013. Understanding the Complex Dynamics of Transparency. Public Administration Review , 73(3): 429– 439. Miller, T. 2019. Explanation in Artificial Intelligence: In-sights from the Social Sciences. Artificial Intelligence , 267: 1–38. Mothilal, R. K.; Sharma, A.; and Tan, C. 2020. Explain-ing machine learning classifiers through diverse counterfac-tual explanations. In Proceedings of the 2020 conference on fairness, accountability, and transparency , 607–617. Pettit, P. 2015. The Robust Demands of the Good: Ethics with Attachment, Virtue, and Respect . Oxford University Press. PrescreenAI. 2025. PrescreenAI — Automated Resume Screening. https://prescreenai.com. Accessed: 2026-20-05. Rhea, A. K.; Markey, K.; D’Arinzo, L.; Schellmann, H.; Sloane, M.; Squires, P.; Arif Khan, F.; and Stoyanovich, J. 2022. An external stability audit framework to test the va-lidity of personality prediction in AI hiring. Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery , 36(6): 2153–2193. Ribeiro, M. T.; Singh, S.; and Guestrin, C. 2016. ” Why should i trust you?” Explaining the predictions of any clas-sifier. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD interna-tional conference on knowledge discovery and data mining ,1135–1144. Rudin, C. 2019. Stop explaining black box machine learning models for high stakes decisions and use interpretable mod-els instead. Nature machine intelligence , 1(5): 206–215. Sinha, A. K.; Akhtar, M. A. K.; and Kumar, A. 2020. Re-sume Screening Using Natural Language Processing and Machine Learning: A Systematic Review. Machine Learn-ing and Information Processing .Slack, D.; Hilgard, A.; Lakkaraju, H.; and Singh, S. 2021. Counterfactual Explanations Can Be Manipulated. In Ad-vances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol-ume 34. Sokol, K.; and Flach, P. 2019. Desiderata for Interpretabil-ity: Explaining Decision Tree Predictions with Counterfac-tuals. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 33, 10035–10036. Upadhyay, S.; Joshi, S.; and Lakkaraju, H. 2021. Towards Robust and Reliable Algorithmic Recourse. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 34, 16926– 16937. Ustun, B.; Spangher, A.; and Liu, Y. 2019. Actionable Recourse in Linear Classification. In Proceedings of the Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency (FAT*) , 10–19. Venkatasubramanian, S.; and Alfano, M. 2020. The Philo-sophical Basis of Algorithmic Recourse. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Trans-parency (FAT*) , 284–293. ACM. Verma, S.; Boonsanong, V.; Hoang, M.; Hines, K.; Dick-erson, J.; and Shah, C. 2024. Counterfactual Explanations and Algorithmic Recourses for Machine Learning: A Re-view. ACM Computing Surveys .Virgolin, M.; and Fracaros, S. 2022. On the Robustness of Sparse Counterfactual Explanations to Adverse Perturba-tions. Artificial Intelligence , 103840. Wachter, S.; Mittelstadt, B.; and Russell, C. 2018. Coun-terfactual Explanations Without Opening the Black Box: Automated Decisions and the GDPR. Harvard Journal of Law & Technology , 31(2): 841–887. Preprint 2017, arXiv:1711.00399. Wang, Z.; Chu, Z.; Blanco, R.; Chen, Z.; Chen, S.-C.; and Zhang, W. 2024. Advancing Graph Counterfactual Fairness through Fair Representation Learning. In Joint European Conference on Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in Databases (ECML-PKDD) , 40–58. Springer. Youssef, P.; Seifert, C.; Schl¨ otterer, J.; et al. 2024. LLMs for generating and evaluating counterfactuals: A comprehensive study. In Findings of the association for computational lin-guistics: EMNLP 2024 , 14809–14824. Zehlike, M.; Yang, K.; and Stoyanovich, J. 2022. Fairness in ranking, part i: Score-based ranking. ACM Computing Surveys , 55(6): 1–36. Hyperparameter Selection 

We report the hyperparameter grids and defaults we employ in Interventions 3 and 4 (model selection strategy, model success metric) in Table 2. The “Default” column shows the non-interventional choice, that is, the SCM setting ξ0.

# Counterfactual distance metrics 

We measure the sensitivity of CE sets to an intervention by averaging a set-level distance d( ˆXξ , ˆXξ′ ) over query in-stances. The set distance is built in two layers: a per-CE cost 

c(x, x ′) on the feature space, and a symmetric aggregator over sets of CEs. 

Per-CE cost. For two feature vectors x, x ′ over continuous features Fcont and categorical features Fcat , we use a mixed-type cost 

c(x, x ′) = X

> j∈F cont

|xj − x′ 

> j

|

MAD j (Xtrain ) + X

> j∈F cat

1xj̸ = x′

> j

 , (10) where MAD j is the median absolute deviation of feature 

j estimated on the run’s training set. The rescaling makes continuous contributions unit-free and outlier-robust; cate-gorical features contribute a 0/1 mismatch indicator. The MAD is fitted per seed on that seed’s training set, so c is run-specific. 

Set-level distance. For two CE sets A, B associated with the same query, we use the symmetric mean-of-nearest-neighbours distance 

d(A, B ) = 12

1

|A|

X

> a∈A

min  

> b∈B

c(a, b ) + 1

|B|

X

> b∈B

min  

> a∈A

c(a, b )

!

.

(11) This is a softened, averaging variant of the Hausdorff dis-tance: replacing each mean by a max recovers Hausdorff. We use the mean form because retrieval-based methods can return CE sets of mildly different sizes ( KDiCE = 5 ,

KNICE = 3 ), and a worst-case aggregator would tend to over-weight the single most discordant CE in either set. If either set is empty, d is undefined and the corresponding query is dropped from the across-query average. 

Aggregation across queries and seeds. For each in-tervention pair (ξ, ξ ′), method, and seed, we compute 

d( ˆXξ (x), ˆXξ′ (x)) at every query x with ˆy = 0 and take the mean over queries. Reported sensitivities are means across seeds with 95% Student-t confidence intervals. 

# Consistency metrics: full definitions 

This appendix provides the formal definitions, equation numbers, and design choices underlying the consistency analysis proposed in our experiments. 

## Explanation set 

We propose a slightly different notation for queries and fea-ture vectors here compared to our experimental section, for convenience and clarity. Let x be a query instance with fea-ture vector x ∈ R|F| over the feature schema F of dataset 

D, and let ˆx be a counterfactual produced for x. We define the explanation set of ˆx relative to x is 

E(ˆ x, x ) = {j ∈ F : ˆ xj̸ = xj }, (12) i.e. the subset of features that the counterfactual changes relative to the query. Continuous features are compared with an absolute tolerance of 10 −9; categorical features are com-pared as strings. 

## Pairwise metrics 

For two counterfactuals ˆxa, ˆxb of the same query x, with ex-planation sets Ea = E(ˆ xa, x ) and Eb = E(ˆ xb, x ), the paper defines several disagreement metrics. We use the symmetric 

Jaccard agreement :Jaccard (Ea, E b) = |Ea ∩ Eb||Ea ∪ Eb| (13) Jaccard is 1 when the two CEs change exactly the same set of features and 0 when they are disjoint. The formulation from (Brughmans, Melis, and Martens 2024) treats two CEs as ”agreeing on feature j” whenever both change j, regardless of how. Their analysis focuses on understanding the possibility that a malicious actor would include an arbitrary feature into an explanation as a means of assuaging recourse. As a consequence, a CE that changes (for instance) occupation from cook to chef agrees with one that changes it from cook to lawyer only at the level of ”occupation was changed”. Here, we are instead interested in understanding the overall direction of change suggested by two CEs across different interventions, and whether the direction is in some sense similar. To recover the directional information for continuous features and the exact-value in-formation for categorical features we define two comple-mentary scalars, both intersected with Ea ∩ Eb so that they only score features both CEs changed. Let Fcont , Fcat partition F into continuous and categorical features. 

Sign Agreement (continuous). We compute the sign agreement of continuous variables in a CE as follows: 

SA(ˆ xa, ˆxb, x ) = 1

|M |

X

> j∈M

1[sign(ˆ xa,j − xj ) = sign(ˆ xb,j − xj )] .J = Ea ∩ Eb ∩ F cont 

SA = 1 when the two CEs always push shared continuous features in the same direction. 

Value Agreement (categorical). Closes the ”agree-on-feature-but-not-value” gap for categorical features: 

VA(ˆ xa, ˆxb, x ) = 1

|M |

X

> j∈M

1[ˆ xa,j = ˆ xb,j ] . (14) 

M = Ea ∩ Eb ∩ F cat (15) 

VA = 1 when the two CEs always pick the same new value for shared categorical features. Table 1: The ACS Microdata Sample columns we employed in our experiments. More detailed definitions are available at the of-ficial ACS documentation: https://www2.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/tech docs/pums/data dict/PUMS Data Dictionary 2018.pdf. Column Name Definition Type JWTR Means of transportation to work Categorical WKW Weeks worked during past 12 months Continuous ENG Ability to Speak English Categorical SCIENGP Achieved a Degree in Science and Engineering, by the NSF Definition Categorical COW Class of worker Categorical SOC Standard Occupational Classification code Categorical JWMNP Travel time to work Continuous Table 2: Random-forest hyperparameter grid searched dur-ing model selection. Cross-validation uses stratified C-fold splits with the success metric M ; the validation strategy C

and metric M are themselves interventions in Section . All other RF parameters are left at their scikit-learn de-faults. Hyperparameter Grid values Default 

n estimators {50 , 100 , 200 } 100 

max depth {5, 10 , None } None 

min samples split {2, 5} 2

Both metrics are undefined when the corresponding in-tersection is empty (no continuous or no categorical feature changed by both CEs). In that case, the original query vector is dropped from the overall computation of the metric. 

## Aggregation over multi-CE sets 

In our setup each (run, method, threshold, intervention, query) tuple yields a CE set of k ≥ 1 counterfactuals (with 

k = 4 for DiCE-kdtree and k = 2 for NICE in our configu-ration). We note that reducing each set to a single representa-tive CE (e.g. with the median for continuous features, mode for categoricals) and applying the single-CE metrics, would smooth out differences in the CEs. Instead, for two CE sets 

A = {ˆxA 

> 1

, . . . , ˆxAkA } and B = {ˆxB 

> 1

, . . . , ˆxBkB } generated for the same query x under different conditions, we define the set-level metric as the average over the Cartesian product: 

Jaccard( A, B, x ) = 1

kAkBkAX

> i=1
> kB

X

> l=1

Jaccard  E(ˆ xAi , x ), E (ˆ xBl , x ) ,

(16) and analogously for FD, SA, and VA.