Title: Explanation-Bound Tool Execution for AI Agents: Server-Verified Action Claims Without Trusting Model Rationales

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.25364v2

Published Time: Thu, 30 Jul 2026 01:08:17 GMT

Number of Pages: 25

Markdown Content:
# Explanation-Bound Tool Execution for AI Agents: Server-Verified Action Claims Without Trusting Model Rationales 

Genliang Zhu Accentrust Georgia Institute of Technology Chu Wang Accentrust University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign 

Abstract 

Tool-using agents expose structured calls but commonly attach free-form rationales. Such rationales are neither authorization nor reliable introspection. We present Explanation-Bound Tool Execution (EBTE), a claim-carrying mediation layer that converts decision-relevant rationale content into typed action claims and checks them against server-held intent, policy, payload, tool, risk, provenance, and freshness facts. EBTE cannot widen baseline authority: conflicts deny, incomplete or uncertain claims review, and only matching claims remain eligible for governed execution. We formalize this composition under explicit mediation and trusted-fact assumptions and implement a versioned reference profile with minimized audit packets. Across 136 authored conformance scenarios, the full profile matches all specified dispositions, admits none of 96 designated hard contradictions, and passes 232 metamorphic checks. A draft-only reference integration forwards none of 48 authored hard cases under EBTE while preserving all 16 soft-review and 4 aligned draft paths. In a frozen 2026-07-12 exploratory 224-attempt hosted-model record, the historical generation/runner agreement counts are 71/96, 66/96, and 19/32; a zero-call revalidation of the preserved minimized claims under the current pipeline yields 70/96, 65/96, and 17/32. In an AgentDojo-derived semantic check, existing high-risk controls make all 12 attack proposals non-allow, while EBTE resolves the task–proposal contradictions as deny. Together, these studies establish profile conformance and demonstrate the feasibility of server-checked action claims within the evaluated settings. 

Keywords: AI agents, tool execution, action claims, auditability, access control, prompt injection, least privilege, OpenPort. I. I NTRODUCTION 

AI agents increasingly act through application tools. They query private data, create records, export collections, update shared state, and invoke administrative operations. The action interface is usually structured: a tool name and payload are validated against a schema. The explanation interface is not. Some systems retain free-form model reasoning, some attach a short justification string, and others provide no decision basis beyond the selected tool itself. This asymmetry creates a governance gap. A payload can be syntactically valid and statically authorized while remaining inconsistent with the user’s request. A justification can sound reasonable while referring to a different resource, omitting an external destination, understating risk, or hiding that an untrusted document influenced the decision. Language-model explanations can also be unfaithful to the factors that caused a prediction [1]–[3]. Consequently, preserving a rationale is not equivalent to preserving trustworthy evidence. The problem is not solved by requiring chain-of-thought. ReAct demonstrates the utility of interleaving reasoning and actions [4], but operational governance needs a smaller and more stable object than an unrestricted reasoning trace. Raw traces can contain private inputs, untrusted instructions, proprietary prompts, or irrelevant internal deliberation. They are also difficult to validate. A security gateway should instead ask a bounded question: what decision-relevant claims must be true for this proposed tool effect to be justified, and can the server verify them independently? 

We propose Explanation-Bound Tool Execution (EBTE), which requires a structured explanation object, 

ToolInvocationExplanation . The object contains a declared intent class, selected tool, policy basis, expected effect, risk tier, uncertainty, untrusted-context dependencies, and evidence references. EBTE treats this object as an untrusted claim set and derives no authority from it. A server-side verifier compares enforceable claims 

Research stewardship: Accentrust. Correspondence: research@accentrust.com. 

1arXiv:2607.25364v2 [cs.AI] 29 Jul 2026 with independently held facts: a current intent certificate, canonical tool metadata, the proposed payload, a policy snapshot, an authorized route record, and a context-risk snapshot. The reference profile carries digest references for intent, policy, and payload. Route eligibility remains a server fact, and each context dependency carries a source-category digest. The verifier produces one of three outcomes. Allow means the explanation is consistent with independently authorized low- or medium-risk facts. Review means the proposal is potentially legitimate but contains uncertainty, incomplete policy evidence, risk-sensitive effects, or another condition requiring operator judgment. Deny means the explanation contradicts a hard execution fact, omits a material untrusted dependency, or attempts to place raw sensitive context in durable evidence. These outcomes compose with, rather than replace, existing authorization and effect controls. Our contributions are:  

> •

Action-claim abstraction. We separate model rationale from a typed, claim-carrying mediation object whose enforceable fields are checked against authoritative application state and whose advisory fields can only tighten routing.  

> •

Explicit-assumption composition. We define a three-outcome decision lattice in which baseline authorization, EBTE, and effect controls combine by their most restrictive outcome; review is non-executing, and any later approval must resolve current facts and recompute the composed decision.  

> •

Executable profile and evidence packet. We provide a bounded schema, stable reason taxonomy, strict reference verifier, minimized structural audit projection, conformance profile, and cross-artifact integrity verifier.  

> •

Tiered mechanism evidence. We evaluate authored profile conformance and predicate ablation, draft-only runtime integration, hosted-model generation, and transfer to an external benchmark structure across 544, 272, 224, and 92 rows, respectively. II. B ACKGROUND AND MOTIVATION 

A. Explanation Is Not Authorization 

Explanations in machine learning are commonly used to help people interpret model outputs [5], [6]. Interpretability is not a single property, and practical users can misunderstand or overgeneralize what tools reveal [7]–[9]. In an agent gateway, the immediate question is not whether a human finds an explanation persuasive. It is whether the proposed external effect remains inside independently authorized bounds. Classical least privilege requires minimizing authority [10]; attribute-based access control evaluates trusted attributes and policy rather than prose [11]. EBTE applies the same discipline to explanations: prose may summarize a decision, but enforceable fields must be checked against authoritative state. This distinction is especially important because current models can produce plausible post hoc rationales. Work on chain-of-thought faithfulness shows that stated reasoning may omit influential biasing features, vary under interventions, or diverge from the process that produced an answer [1]–[3]. EBTE instead verifies an externally testable contract about the action being requested. 

B. Tool-Using Agent Threats 

Indirect prompt injection and sandbox studies show that untrusted content can redirect integrated applications and tool-using agents [12], [13]. AgentDojo and InjecAgent systematize harmful and exfiltrating action tasks [14], [15]. ToolHijacker and MCPTox demonstrate that tool descriptions and catalogs are themselves attack surfaces [16], [17]. StruQ separates instructions from data at the model input boundary [18]; AttriGuard studies causal attribution for tool invocations [19]. EBTE is complementary. It assumes that model-level defenses and attribution can fail, then checks whether the explanation’s effect claims agree with server-held facts. MCP identifies tools as model-controlled primitives and specifies transport authorization semantics [20], [21]. Token validation is necessary, but a valid token does not establish that a particular action is supported by the current user request. NIST’s Generative AI Profile emphasizes documentation, testing, human oversight, and monitoring [22]; OWASP recommends least privilege and approval for high-impact actions [23]. EBTE operationalizes a narrow part of that guidance at the tool-effect boundary. 

C. Auditability and Minimal Disclosure 

Recent work distinguishes accountability, auditability, and the act of auditing agent behavior [24]. Static analysis can identify risky agent code and configuration [25], but post-deployment reconstruction also requires runtime decision evidence. A complete raw transcript is neither necessary nor always safe. Evidence digests should use a 2deterministic serialization such as JCS when JSON objects are hashed [26]. EBTE records normalized categories, reason codes, bounded identifiers, and cryptographic digests. The structural evaluation covers packet completeness and rejection of an explicit raw-content field and fixed synthetic marker; semantic content controls and operator comprehension are outside its scope. III. P ROBLEM DEFINITION AND THREAT MODEL 

A. System Model 

An agent receives user request u, observes context X, selects tool t, constructs payload x, and emits explanation 

e. The application gateway holds independently derived facts: 

F = ( C, T, P, R, X s, Q, H ),

where C is an intent certificate, T is trusted canonical tool metadata, P is the current application policy, R is a route record or authorized candidate set, Xs is a current context-risk snapshot, Q is preflight or state-witness evidence, and H is integrity-protected audit state. Model-visible tool descriptions may be attacker-controlled; T

denotes a separately governed registry entry. Not every deployment must implement every component, but a missing fact cannot be silently replaced by a model assertion. The public profile evaluated here directly resolves C, T, P, R, 

and Xs; execution-time state witness Q and durable audit integrity H are composition requirements rather than claims established by the draft-only prototype. The gateway first evaluates ordinary authorization and effect controls. EBTE then verifies explanation claims against F and selects an execution mode. For high-risk actions, a consistent explanation can still require preflight, confirmation, or draft review. 

B. Adversary Capabilities 

We consider an adversary that can:  

> •

influence model-visible documents, messages, tool outputs, or tool descriptions;  

> •

cause the planner to select an incorrect tool or construct an overbroad payload;  

> •

induce a plausible but incomplete, contradictory, or risk-understated explanation;  

> •

omit or mislabel untrusted context dependencies;  

> •

replay stale explanation evidence after intent, policy, route, or context changes; and  

> •

attempt to place private or adversarial raw content into durable audit records, flood the review queue, or use detailed repair feedback as an adaptive oracle. We do not assume the model, planner, retriever, explanation generator, model-visible tool catalog, or free-text summaries are trusted. We assume that principal and tenant binding, gateway code, the canonical policy and tool stores, digest implementation, clocks or version sources, and scoped current-state resolution are correct. Evidence lookup must be bound to the authenticated application, actor, and session. A compromised fact source, confused-deputy identity binding, malicious code inside an otherwise authorized tool, out-of-band side effects, colluding administrators, and a fully compromised enforcement process remain outside the guarantee envelope. 

a) Lifecycle boundary.: The security-relevant unit includes both initial verification and any later approval. A 

Review outcome may create a draft but cannot execute an effect. Before acting on an approved draft, the gateway must reload current intent, route, policy, context, payload, and preflight facts and recompute the composed decision. The present runtime study covers only draft creation; the later approval transition remains unevaluated. Rate limiting, coarse model-facing errors, and independently governed audit access contain review-flooding and feedback-oracle risks. 

C. Security and Governance Goals 

EBTE targets five goals: 1) Non-authorization: explanation content cannot grant authority absent from the underlying policy and effect-control path. 2) Contradiction detection: material mismatches between explanation and trusted facts cannot yield immediate allow. 3) Review routing: uncertainty and incomplete soft evidence escalate without being mislabeled as hard attacks. 4) Structural replay support: a packet identifies the profile, normalized predicate outcomes, fact digests, and reason categories needed for rule-level replay when the referenced facts remain resolvable. 35) Minimal ordinary disclosure: the default packet excludes raw untrusted content; semantic secret detection and authorized source retrieval remain separate controls. IV. E XPLANATION CONTRACT 

A. Contract Fields 

Table I defines the core explanation fields. Human-readable summaries are permitted, but enforcement depends on typed fields and evidence references. 

Field Purpose Independent comparison 

Intent classes and summary Declares the request-level purpose. Intent certificate classes, allowed operation, and request digest; summary text is advisory. Selected tool and reason code Identifies the proposed capability. Trusted registry and authorized route record; reason-code prose is advisory. Policy basis Lists required scopes and rule identifiers. Current authorization and policy snapshot. Expected effect Declares operation, resources, bounds, fields, and destination. Tool semantics, payload, preflight impact, and intent bounds. Risk tier Declares impact sensitivity. Server-owned tool and policy risk. Uncertainty Declares ambiguity or missing evidence. One-way escalation only; a low declaration cannot establish certainty. Context dependencies Declares categorical provenance and digests. Current context-risk source and digest; claimed influence is advisory. Evidence references Binds intent, policy, and payload evidence. Exactly three current digest-bearing records in profile v0.1. 

TABLE I CORE TO O L IN V O C A T I O N EX P L A N A T I O N FIELDS . N O FIELD IS SELF -AUTHORIZING .

Claim field Authoritative source Implemented predicate Included mutation or status 

Schema and version Public JSON Schema and profile Strict validation before semantic comparison; unknown or malformed input cannot allow. Parseable subfields retain independently known contradictions. Invalid enumeration, mixed-malformed, and malformed-object groups. Intent and operation Current intent certificate Declared classes are confined to certified classes; payload operation and effect are checked against the certified operation set. Unavailable authoritative subfields are unknown, not matches. Class, operation, payload-outside-intent, and availability controls. Tool and route Canonical registry and current authorized route Declared and proposed tool agree, and the tool belongs to the server-owned candidate set. Tool and authorized-route mismatch. Resource and bounds Intent certificate, payload, and tool semantics Resource type and target set agree with the payload; each applicable effect claim covers the payload and remains contained by intent. Substantive claims on inapplicable dimensions deny. Resource, overbreadth, field, amount, record, destination, upper-bound, safe-slack, and inapplicability controls. Policy basis Current policy snapshot Required scopes, rule identifiers, and policy decision match current server facts. Missing or fabricated rule, scope, and decision mutations. Risk Canonical tool and policy risk Understatement escalates to review; declared risk never lowers server risk. Risk-understatement mutation. Uncertainty Model declaration and server review policy High uncertainty can only tighten to review; low uncertainty is not independently certified. One-way advisory field. Context Current context source/category and digest The normalized dependency-pair set is empty for trusted context and exactly the current pair for untrusted context; an unavailable authoritative state is unknown. 

instructionInfluence is advisory. Omission, extra-pair, duplicate-pair, and current-state availability controls. Evidence references Current intent, policy, and payload records Exactly one current digest for each profile-v0.1 type. Any independently known mismatch denies even when another type is missing or duplicated; unavailable current state is unknown. Stale, missing, duplicate, compound, and authoritative-availability controls. Summary and tool reason None; operator-facing only Bounded and non-authorizing; never used to widen a decision. Schema and disclosure checks only. 

TABLE II FIELD -TO -AUTHORITY CONTRACT FOR THE REFERENCE PROFILE .

B. Chain-of-Thought Boundary 

The contract is not chain-of-thought. EBTE neither requests nor requires hidden reasoning traces. The 

intentSummary , toolReasonCode , instructionInfluence , and low-uncertainty declarations are non-authorizing. Profile v0.1 routes high uncertainty to review and records the other advisory values without using them to relax or tighten its disposition; a separately versioned deployment policy may use them only for stricter 4handling. Enforceable comparisons use server-checkable values such as operation, route membership, resource identifier, record bound, risk tier, destination, policy rule, and evidence digest. This boundary reduces privacy exposure and avoids treating fluent prose or self-reported cognition as a security proof. 

C. Minimal-Disclosure Evidence 

Context dependencies contain a source category and digest plus an advisory influence flag. The ordinary evidence projection omits raw document text, messages, customer records, proprietary prompts, and model traces. The current artifact rejects an explicit rawContent field and scans for a fixed synthetic marker; bounded free-text summaries remain a possible encoded-disclosure channel. Production use therefore requires semantic content controls, retention policy, and separately authorized source access beyond the structural checks evaluated here. V. F ORMAL MODEL 

Definition 1 (Explanation projection) . Let ϕe(e) map explanation e to normalized claims over dimensions 

D = {schema , intent , tool , route , resource , effect , policy , risk , uncertainty , context , evidence , privacy }.

Let ϕs(t, x, F) map the proposed action and server state to independently held facts over the same dimensions. 

The implementation refines these dimensions into 18 stable packet predicates: schema validity; tool identity; route membership; intent-class equality; operation equality and intent confinement; resource identity; effect bounds; destination; payload confinement; policy-basis scope/rule and disposition; risk; uncertainty; context digest; evidence completeness and freshness; and raw context disclosure. Route is therefore explicit rather than silently folded into tool identity, while evidence completeness and freshness refine the evidence dimension. Authoritative availability is checked per field or predicate dependency rather than with one whole-object gate. A missing or malformed server operand marks only its dependent predicate or predicates unknown; a contradiction on an independent available operand is still hard. Resource type and resource ID availability, policy scope and rule availability, and each required evidence digest are represented separately. Registered authoritative intent classes, operations, and context source types must also belong to the public profile taxonomy; an otherwise bounded but unregistered server value is unavailable, not a mismatch. For an optional authoritative effect fact, the verifier uses three states. A present valid value is known independently of malformed envelope siblings; a present invalid value is unknown; and an absent value is known absent only when the corresponding operation/resource envelope is complete. Thus malformed siblings neither fabricate inapplicability nor mask a contradiction on a present valid bound. Record bounds are integers in [0 , 10 6] and amount bounds are finite numbers in [0 , 10 12 ], matching the public profile. Exact-set comparisons slice at the registered field cap before filtering and deduplicating parseable bounded strings. The packet serializes exactly the same canonical operands. A duplicate matching value, invalid extra, or beyond-cap tail therefore cannot create a packet-invisible semantic result, while a parseable in-cap outside or missing value cannot be hidden by a malformed sibling. The claim-effect normalizer accepts only public claim field names; payload-only names such as resourceId , limit , amount , and fields are never aliases for claim fields. Evidence freshness is likewise independent of one-to-one completeness: any format-valid required reference that differs from its available current digest is hard, even if another required type is missing or duplicated. Authoritative evidence is projected in the fixed required-type order; extra keys make overall evidence completeness unavailable but cannot evict a known current digest from the packet. For dimension d, define a comparison function 

vd(e, t, x, F) ∈ { match , soft , hard , unknown }.

For an applicable numeric effect dimension j, the reference profile accepts the declared bound only when 

bj (x) ≤ bj (e) ≤ bj (C).

For field sets it requires 

F (x) ⊆ F (e) ⊆ F (C).

5A substantive declaration on a payload-inapplicable numeric, field, or destination dimension is hard. Context pairs are compared after set normalization: 

Deps (e) = 

(

∅, ¬Untrusted (Xs),

{(source (Xs), digest (Xs)) }, Untrusted (Xs).

Unavailable authoritative operands yield unknown rather than match. For required evidence type k, any format-valid claimed digest h ∈ He(k) with available current hs(k) and h̸ = hs(k) yields hard freshness independently of whether |He(k)| = 1 for every required type. A hard result denotes contradiction with an execution-critical fact, including tool identity, operation, target resource, effect bound, external destination, material context omission, or raw-context disclosure. A soft result denotes uncertainty, an authoritative review requirement, incomplete policy evidence, risk understatement, or another condition that requires review but does not by itself prove malicious intent. Unknown evidence cannot be interpreted as a match. Let the decision domain be the ordered set 

D3 = ( {Allow , Review , Deny }, ⪯), Allow ≺ Review ≺ Deny .

Map predicate outcomes and the server-owned tool-risk requirement into this domain: 

s(match ) = Allow , s(soft ) = s(unknown ) = Review , s(hard ) = Deny ,r(t) = 

(

Review , HighRisk (t),

Allow , otherwise .

The EBTE decision is the least upper bound 

Decision (e, t, x, F) = G

> d∈D

s(vd(e, t, x, F)) 

!

⊔ r(t).

Thus any hard predicate dominates; absent a hard predicate, soft, unknown, or high-risk evidence yields review; only all-match, non-high-risk claims allow. Let d0(u, t, x, F) denote current baseline authorization and routing. Let dE = Decision (e, t, x, F) denote the EBTE disposition, and let dX (t, x, F) denote current effect control. All three belong to D3. Their composition is the least upper bound 

d⋆ = d0 ⊔ dE ⊔ dX = max  

> ⪯

{d0, d E , d X }.

An effect may execute only when d⋆ = Allow . A Review result creates a non-executing draft, preflight, or confirmation object. Approval of that object is a new decision event: all authoritative facts must be resolved again and d⋆ recomputed at action time. The reference library exports this same three-operand most-restrictive join, and the conformance runner enumerates all 27 possible triples in D33 . This validates the finite join implementation, not complete mediation by the draft-only wrapper: that study observes dE before a forced-draft boundary and does not instantiate an effect executor. 

Proposition 1 (Design invariant: non-widening composition) . For all inputs, d⋆ ⪰ d0 and d⋆ ⪰ dX . EBTE therefore cannot make either baseline authorization or effect control less restrictive. Proof. d⋆ is the least upper bound under ⪯, so it is at least every operand. No explanation field occurs in an override path outside the join. 

Proposition 2 (Design invariant: hard-contradiction non-execution) . Assume complete mediation, sound hard-comparison predicates, correct and current server facts, and action-time recomputation. If an execution-critical dimension returns hard , the associated effect does not execute. Proof. A hard result yields dE = Deny , hence d⋆ = Deny . Complete mediation permits execution only at Allow .Action-time recomputation extends the argument to a proposal that previously entered review. 6Proposition 3 (Design invariant: decision monotonicity) . Holding all other facts fixed, replacing a matched dimension with soft, unknown, or hard evidence cannot produce a less restrictive dE or d⋆.Proof. A soft or unknown dimension removes the all-match condition and yields at least review; a hard dimension yields deny. The join operator is monotone in each operand. 

Proposition 4 (Design invariant: conditional structural replay) . Let the ordinary audit projection contain the profile version, EBTE disposition dE and reason categories, schema-error categories, predicate identifiers and outcomes, bounded normalized claim and authoritative operands, and the current intent, policy, payload, and applicable context digests. If the corresponding authoritative facts remain available through authorized digest resolution, those elements suffice to replay the reference-profile rule evaluation without storing raw untrusted content in the ordinary packet. Proof. The deterministic predicates consume the recorded normalized operands and resolved facts rather than source prose. The projection records the operands, categorical predicate results, and digest references used by the rule table. Re-evaluating that table therefore recovers the recorded disposition, conditional on authorized resolution of the same facts. This invariant concerns profile-level rule replay, not semantic secret detection, source retention, principal or tenant binding, or whether a human can understand the action without separately authorized source access. These design invariants hold under the stated assumptions. Their scope excludes the correctness of intent classification, route membership, risk labels, policy facts, source digests, reviewer decisions, and the later action-time transition. The reference packet omits a principal–tenant–session–action envelope and an independent snapshot-version field; cross-domain replay therefore requires those values to be added and integrity-bound. VI. EBTE A RCHITECTURE  

> Tool proposal
> t, x, e
> Server facts
> C, T, P, R, X s, Q
> Explanation contract parser and verifier Allow governed action path Review draft / preflight / confirm Deny stable reason code Minimal-disclosure evidence: normalized fields, predicate outcomes, decision, reason categories, and evidence digests
> Fig. 1. EBTE verifies an untrusted explanation against independently held facts. Every outcome produces minimized decision evidence.

A. Processing Stages 

The reference design has six stages: 1) Parse and bound. Reject unknown schema versions, excessive field sizes, raw context, and malformed evidence references. 2) Resolve current facts. Load the current intent, tool, policy, route, context, and preflight records under the authenticated application and actor. 3) Normalize. Map explanation claims and server facts to a common operation-resource-effect representation. 4) Compare. Evaluate every contract dimension with stable categorical results. 5) Route. Apply the hard/soft decision rules and then the existing risk-sensitive action pipeline. 6) Record. Store minimized, integrity-bound decision evidence and exclude raw untrusted content. 

B. Stable Reason Categories 

Hard categories cover tool identity, target resources, effect bounds, omitted untrusted dependencies, and raw-context disclosure. Soft categories cover risk understatement, high uncertainty, and missing policy evidence. Stable external codes identify the failed contract dimension while omitting source content and system-topology detail. 7VII. C OMPOSITION WITH AGENT GOVERNANCE 

EBTE is the fourth layer in a compositional governance path: intent → context authority → safe route → explanation → effect controls .

Intent-governed authorization narrows capabilities to the user’s request [27]. Context-sensitive permission shrinkage reduces authority when untrusted content is present. Safe routing confines model selection to an eligible candidate set. EBTE then checks whether the claimed reason and expected effect agree with those upstream records and the actual payload. Finally, preflight, draft, confirmation, idempotency, and state-witness controls govern side effects. The layers are not interchangeable. A correct explanation does not repair an unauthorized tool. A safe route does not prove payload bounds. A valid intent certificate does not show that all untrusted context dependencies were disclosed. Conversely, an explanation contradiction can provide an additional deny or review signal even when the underlying credential is broad. VIII. R EFERENCE ARTIFACT AND EVALUATION METHOD 

A. Research Questions  

> •

RQ1—Contract and conformance: Which action claims and authoritative predicates constitute the reference profile, and does the implementation conform on the included mutations and metamorphic relations?  

> •

RQ2—Draft-only integration: Can the verifier mediate a reference intent-to-draft path without forwarding authored hard contradictions, while preserving aligned and soft-review draft paths?  

> •

RQ3—Generation behavior: What parse, schema, disposition, provider, and repair failure modes appear when four hosted model families emit the bounded contract?  

> •

RQ4—External semantic transfer: On a pinned external task structure, what additional diagnostic distinction does authoritative task–proposal binding provide beyond the existing high-risk non-allow gate? 

B. Conditions 

We compare the full profile with three predicate ablations: 1) Free-form justification: any nonempty summary satisfies the explanation requirement; high-risk tools still route to review. 2) Structured schema only: required fields must be present, but their values are not compared with server facts. 3) Payload-bound explanation: tool, operation, resource, and numeric payload bounds are compared; policy, risk, provenance, and privacy checks are omitted. 4) Full EBTE: the reference-profile contract dimensions are checked, hard and soft contradictions are separated, and ordinary audit evidence is minimized. Expected dispositions and the full evaluator instantiate the same public profile. The study therefore measures implementation conformance and the incremental coverage of named predicates over the authored fixture set. 

C. Task Construction 

The suite contains 8 abstract task families: bounded record summarization, bounded expense creation, record update, record export, record deletion, appointment creation, agent-version publication, and knowledge search. All identifiers and payloads are synthetic. The evidence snapshot represented by the preamble macros contains one aligned scenario and 17 total scenarios per family, including schema, tool, authorized-route, intent-class, operation, resource, effect-bound, policy-rule, context, disclosure, evidence-freshness, and evidence-completeness mutations. This yields 136 tasks and 544 task– configuration rows. Expected outcomes follow the profile definition: aligned low/medium-risk cases allow, aligned high-risk cases review, hard contradictions deny, and soft or incomplete evidence reviews. A payload-outside-intent case keeps the explanation consistent with the payload so that only a verifier resolving the authoritative intent boundary can reject it. Table II records the source and tested status of each predicate. 8D. Metrics 

We report profile-disposition agreement (PDA), specified non-allow coverage (SNAC), hard-fixture allow rate (HFAR), soft-fixture allow rate (SFAR), aligned-fixture agreement (AFA), review-routing fraction (RRF), fact-reference resolvability (FRR), and explicit-fixture leak acceptance (EFLA). PDA measures agreement with the authored profile, and SNAC measures the fraction of designated non-aligned fixtures routed non-allow. RRF summarizes the deliberately enriched fixture mixture. FRR requires a valid bounded schema, exactly one current intent, policy, and payload digest, and a syntactically valid digest for every declared context dependency. These rates describe the complete finite fixture set. The artifact also runs 232 metamorphic checks. For every task, full EBTE must be at least as restrictive as the payload-bound configuration. For each registered hard mutation, the changed case must not yield allow or a less restrictive outcome than the aligned case. IX. D ETERMINISTIC RESULTS                                           

> Configuration PDA SNAC HFAR SFAR AFA RRF FRR EFLA
> Free-form justification 0.1471 0.3750 0.6250 0.6250 1.0000 0.3750 0.0000 1.0000 Structured schema only 0.3162 0.5313 0.5729 0.1563 1.0000 0.4632 0.0000 0.0000 Payload-bound explanation 0.5515 0.6875 0.3646 0.1563 1.0000 0.3750 0.0000 0.0000 Full EBTE 1.0000 1.0000 0.0000 0.0000 1.0000 0.2574 0.6471 0.0000
> TABLE III AUTHORED PROFILE -CONFORMANCE AND PREDICATE -ABLATION RESULTS OVER 136 TASKS PER CONFIGURATION .

A. RQ1: Predicate-Ablation Conformance 

Free-form justification applies only the review requirement already attached to high-risk tools and has HFAR 0.6250 and SFAR 0.6250 in this snapshot. Strict schema validation routes malformed and extra-field disclosure fixtures non-allow, yielding SNAC 0.5313, HFAR 0.5729, and SFAR 0.1563. Payload binding activates the authored tool, resource, operation, and numeric predicates, yielding SNAC 0.6875 and HFAR 0.3646. It lacks the full profile’s authoritative intent, route, context, freshness, risk, and policy comparisons. Full EBTE returns non-allow for every registered non-aligned fixture in the current snapshot. It denies all 96 designated hard cases and routes all 32 soft cases to review, matching the implemented rule table over the included scenarios. 

B. RQ1: Aligned Paths and Review Routing 

All four configurations preserve the authored disposition for all 8 aligned tasks. 5 low- or medium-risk aligned tasks allow, and 3 policy- or risk-sensitive aligned tasks review in the current snapshot. Full EBTE’s RRF is 0.2574 because the suite deliberately includes those aligned review paths and all soft fixtures. Other configurations route different authored mutations to review as a consequence of their active predicates. 

C. RQ1: Structural Packets, Fact References, and Disclosure Fixtures 

Full EBTE emits a versioned structural packet for all 136 full-profile outcomes. The conformance checker verifies packet identity, decision and reason equality, all 18 stable predicate identifiers and categorical outcomes, per-operand authoritative availability, cap-identical normalized claim/action/fact operands, the three current authoritative digests in fixed type order, and exclusion of both free-text summaries and the fixed raw marker. It also records bounded Boolean claim diagnostics for raw disclosure, duplicate evidence type, missing policy basis, and schema-error truncation; these distinguish special schema dispositions without retaining the offending content. Predicate aggregation uses the total order hard > unknown > soft > match , independent of reason order. FRR is separately 0.6471 because stale, duplicate, or schema-invalid claims do not have a complete current claim-to-fact reference set even though their non-allow packet remains structurally well formed. The ablations emit no full EBTE packet and have FRR 0. Strict schema validation and full EBTE reject every included explicit rawContent fixture, and the artifact scanner reports no fixed synthetic marker in generated evidence rows. 9D. RQ1: Metamorphic Regression Checks 

All 232 registered checks pass in the current snapshot. Full EBTE is never less restrictive than payload binding for the same task, and each designated hard mutation is non-allow and at least as restrictive as its aligned counterpart. These checks provide regression evidence for the stated decision order. A separate control-flow regression applies an authoritative policy denial to each task family. All 8 schema-valid claims and all 8 malformed claims remain deny. Thus, a generic schema-review route cannot downgrade an independently resolved server denial. These auxiliary checks are outside the 136 profile-task denominator and are reported separately. The same runner keeps all 8 matching authoritative-review cases at review, all 8 mixed schema-soft plus semantic-hard cases at deny, all 8 raw-schema-deny plus semantic-hard cases with both hard outcomes retained, and all 8 hard-plus-soft packet cases truthful on both evaluated predicates. It also routes all 4 quantitative-bound, 1 destination, and 1 field-set omissions to review while marking the corresponding packet predicate unknown. Compound evidence controls keep all 8 stale-plus-duplicate cases at deny with freshness hard and completeness unknown, while all 8 unavailable current-digest cases remain review with both evidence predicates unknown. Mixed-array controls distinguish 8 aligned duplicate/invalid-extra cases, which remain schema review without a fabricated semantic hard result, from 8 cases containing a parseable outside value, which remain deny. All 8 malformed sibling-field cases retain policy self-denial, all 8 object/array raw-field cases deny, and the 8 malformed-effect family pairs return review alone or deny when an independent hard mismatch is present. Effect controls deny all 4 claims that exceed intent and all 8 substantive claims on inapplicable dimensions, while preserving 4 bounds satisfying payload ≤ claim ≤ intent. Context controls deny all 8 trusted-context or extra-pair mismatches, preserve 3 duplicate-current pairs after set normalization, and route all 8 unavailable current states to review with context unknown. Finally, 8 field-scoped availability controls and 8 malformed-fact plus independent hard controls verify that unavailable operands cannot appear as matches or mask safely resolved contradictions. The 8 empty intent/payload object pairs, 8 missing payload-envelope siblings, and 5 missing intent-envelope siblings ensure that optional absence is not misread as known inapplicability until the corresponding authoritative envelope is available. Conversely, 8 present-optional controls retain known record, amount, field, and destination contradictions despite malformed siblings; 4 controls independently preserve resource-type and resource-ID results; and 8 out-of-domain server bounds remain unknown. Policy and evidence controls independently cover 8 self-denials with unavailable current policy dispositions, 8 malformed scopes with known rule mismatches, 8 valid empty/empty scope sets, 8 empty/nonempty scope differences, and 8 extra authoritative evidence keys combined with known stale required digests. Canonical-replay controls include 3 scope-tail shapes, 1 forty-field pair, 8 over-cap route/resource family pairs, 8 capped-claim family suites, 1 allowed-field tail, 3 context tails, 8 invalid scalar families, and 3 invalid current-source cases. Finally, 4 claim-alias pairs, 4 authoritative-taxonomy controls, 2 diagnostic collision pairs, and 2 reason-order checks exercise the packet trust boundary. Schema validation adds 2 Unicode code-point boundaries and 2 oversized-array/error-cap controls. These parsed-object checks do not replace the profile requirement that an integration enforce the 1 MiB UTF-8 transport limit before JSON parsing. The runner also exhaustively verifies the 27 baseline–EBTE– effect decision triples. X. D RAFT -O NLY REFERENCE INTEGRATION 

A. Design 

To answer RQ2, we compose the reusable verifier with an OpenPort reference implementation through in-process HTTP injection at the intent and draft endpoints. 4 task families map to implemented action tools: transaction creation, update, soft deletion, and bounded export. The evaluated snapshot contains 68 tasks and 272 task–configuration rows. For every task, the harness creates an intent certificate through the reference intent endpoint. If the explanation configuration returns allow or review, the wrapper submits a synthetic payload to the reference draft endpoint and binds the intent certificate. If the configuration returns deny, the draft endpoint is not called. Each row uses a fresh in-memory runtime, and every forwarded action terminates as a non-executing draft. 

B. Results 

10 Configuration HCFD Soft draft Aligned draft Audit bind FRR Exec. p95 verify ms p95 total ms                                       

> Free-form justification 1.0000 1.0000 1.0000 0.9412 0.0000 0.0000 0.0027 2.5756 Structured schema only 0.9167 1.0000 1.0000 0.9375 0.0000 0.0000 0.1231 1.8426 Payload-bound explanation 0.5833 1.0000 1.0000 0.9167 0.0000 0.0000 0.0943 1.4660 Full EBTE 0.0000 1.0000 1.0000 1.0000 0.6471 0.0000 0.3289 1.4453
> TABLE IV LOCAL DRAFT -ONLY INTEGRATION RESULTS OVER 68 TASKS PER CONFIGURATION . HCFD IS THE FRACTION OF 48 DESIGNATED HARD CASES FORWARDED TO THE DRAFT ENDPOINT . A LL FORWARDED REQUESTS ARE FORCED TO DRAFT ;LATENCY IS A HARNESS DIAGNOSTIC .

Free-form justification forwards every designated hard case to the draft endpoint. Strict schema validation blocks malformed cases but forwards hard semantic mismatches outside its scope, yielding HCFD 0.9167. Payload binding blocks direct tool, resource, and effect mismatches but forwards cases governed by omitted predicates, yielding HCFD 0.5833. Full EBTE forwards none of 48 designated hard cases, while all 16 soft and 4 aligned cases create governed drafts. Its audit-binding rate is 1.0000; the lower ablation values reflect rows stopped before a bound draft rather than missing bindings on successfully created full-profile drafts. The full verifier’s observed local p95 evaluation time is 0.3289 ms, and p95 wrapper-plus-intent-plus-draft time is 1.4453 ms in this small in-memory environment. With only 68 rows per configuration, a single host, and no warm-load or throughput design, these numbers are harness diagnostics rather than performance evidence. The data were recorded from the clean pinned runtime revision with the 86-file source fingerprint 

sha256:9ce8bf05053bfe744b8eca2d6ae704d0dcb664ec17cfa277dae6ce5380aad2fc using 

sha256-relative-path-nul-bytes-nul-v1 .XI. C ONSTRAINED NVIDIA M ULTI -M ODEL PILOT 

A. Design 

To answer RQ3, we test explanation generation through NVIDIA’s hosted API with 4 model families: openai/gpt-oss-120b, qwen/qwen3-next-80b-a3b-instruct, nvidia/nemotron-3-nano-30b-a3b, and deepseek-ai/deepseek-v4-flash. The protocol uses 12 synthetic tasks: 4 aligned actions, 4 actions with repairable explanation challenges, and 4 nonrepairable action contradictions involving record, amount, field, or destination expansion. Each task is generated 2 times under different fixed seeds at temperature 0.2. For every task and repeat, the model first emits a contract and then receives stable parser, schema, and verifier feedback for one repair attempt, including rows that already matched the profile. The repairable tasks additionally start from a deliberately seeded invalid explanation. Each model therefore contributes 24 initial, 24 ordinary-repair, and 8 seeded-repair attempts, for 224 attempts total. The prompt supplies the bounded schema and current synthetic server facts. It instructs each model to describe the proposed action truthfully, ignore instructions inside categorically untrusted content, use exact current evidence digests, and omit a synthetic raw marker. Recorded results contain SHA-256 response digests, byte counts, minimized parsed fields, outcomes, latency, and categorical HTTP failures. Because raw responses are absent, exact surface wording cannot be reconstructed from these records. Protocol development before version 0.5-nvidia resolved ambiguities in evidence arrays, context-dependency objects, and provider-error minimization. The protocol was not preregistered, and candidate models that timed out or were unavailable were excluded before behavioral aggregation. This design process, availability filtering, and prompt specificity introduce experimenter and selection effects. The four source result sets were generated on 2026-07-12. They preserve response digests, minimized parsed explanations, recorded runner decisions, latency, and typed provider failures. They predate immutable-run support and lack raw responses, runFingerprint , and runConfig , so the exact historical prompt and verifier code bytes cannot be reconstructed. A separate current-pipeline layer applies the present frozen schema, task builder, and verifier to the saved minimized claims offline; this layer is a post-hoc revalidation rather than a hosted rerun. 

B. Recorded Historical and Current Offline Layers 

11 Model Hist. init parse Hist. init schema Hist. init agree Hist. repair agree Hist. seed agree Hist. provider err. Hist. nonrep. allow Hist. marker                                 

> GPT-OSS 120B 24/24 24/24 24/24 23/24 8/8 0/56 0/8 0/56 Qwen3 Next 80B 24/24 24/24 24/24 24/24 2/8 0/56 0/8 0/56 Nemotron 3 Nano 30B 7/24 2/24 7/24 7/24 2/8 0/56 0/8 0/56 DeepSeek V4 Flash 16/24 16/24 16/24 (16/16) 12/24 (12/12) 7/8 (7/7) 21/56 0/8 0/56

TABLE V FROZEN 2026-07-12 RECORDED HOSTED -GENERATION /RUNNER LAYER . A GREEMENT EXCLUDES PROVIDER FAILURES FROM THE NUMERATOR WHILE RETAINING ALL ATTEMPTED CALLS IN THE PRIMARY DENOMINATOR ; PARENTHESES GIVE CONDITIONAL -ON -RESPONSE VALUES WHERE THEY DIFFER . T HESE ARE HISTORICAL RUNNER DECISIONS , NOT CURRENT -VERIFIER DISPOSITIONS .                    

> Layer Attempts Responses Provider fail Saved claims Parse fail Hist. conformant Init agree Repair agree Seed agree Current A/R/D
> Current post-hoc offline 224 203 21 160 43 149 70/96 (70/88) 65/96 (65/84) 17/32 (17/31) 56/75/93

TABLE VI CURRENT -PIPELINE POST -HOC OFFLINE REVALIDATION OF THE IMMUTABLE MINIMIZED 2026-07-12 SOURCE LAYER . P ARENTHESES GIVE CONDITIONAL -ON -RESPONSE AGREEMENT . I T MADE ZERO MODEL , PROVIDER , OR NETWORK CALLS AND IS NOT A NEW GENERATION RUN .

Across the frozen recorded calls, historical generated-output/runner agreement excluding provider failures is 71/96 initially, 66/96 after ordinary feedback, and 19/32 for seeded-defect repair. Conditional on receiving a provider response, the corresponding historical values are 71/88, 66/84, and 19/31. Provider availability is therefore reported separately from recorded generation agreement rather than being credited when a transport failure happened to route to the authored review disposition. Variation in this historical layer is substantial: GPT-OSS and Qwen agree on every initial attempt, Nemotron has frequent parse/schema failures, and DeepSeek agrees on every successful response but has substantial provider failure. In the recorded historical layer, among the 96 paired initial/ordinary-repair attempts, 63 remain agreeing, 8 move from agreement to disagreement, 3 move from disagreement to agreement, and 22 remain disagreeing. Historical feedback is therefore not monotonically associated with recorded profile agreement. For the 32 historical post-feedback attempts involving nonrepairable actions, 17 return deny and 15 return non-executing review; none returns allow. Across all 64 recorded expected-deny initial/repair attempts, the allow count is also zero. No recorded output contains the fixed synthetic marker (0/224). The 21/224 historical provider failures are retained as attempted calls and route to review. The current offline layer evaluates all 224 immutable attempt records: 203 retained provider responses, 21 typed provider failures, 160 saved parsed explanations, and 43 response parse failures. Its 149 historically schema-conformant rows pass the current task-fact evidence/context consistency precheck. Current disposition agreement is 70/96, 65/96, and 17/32 over all corresponding attempts, or 70/88, 65/84, and 17/31 conditional on a provider response. The resulting current operational dispositions are 56 allow, 75 review, and 93 deny. Within the 32 nonrepairable post-feedback records, the current pipeline returns 26 deny, 6 review, and 0 allow. Across the 64 current expected-deny initial/repair records, the allow count is 0. Relative to the recorded historical runner disposition, 56 received-response rows change: 5 allow-to-review, 4 allow-to-deny, and 47 review-to-deny. There are 0 deny-to-review or deny-to-allow transitions. These are verifier-version transitions, not changes in model behavior. The derived layer is bound to provenance fingerprint 

sha256:8fdb3c704c964a2c9474c190b4cdafca8c08890bce6f4f3736ca1aabd109abb1 and made 0 network, model, or provider calls. Because the historical sources lack runFingerprint , runConfig , raw responses, and exact historical prompt/code bytes, the current layer cannot retroactively authenticate or reproduce the original online configuration. The historical layer records cross-model interface behavior on the fact-complete suite, while the current layer records post-hoc dispositions recoverable from the minimized saved fields. The reported scope is limited to fail-closed routing, generation failures, and repair transitions in these records. XII. P INNED AGENT DOJO SEMANTIC ADAPTATION 

A. Design and Provenance 

To answer RQ4, we reuse a minimized proposal inventory derived from a pinned AgentDojo [14] banking-suite semantic adapter: release 0.1.35 , clean revision a75aba7631d3ca5fb7ab938965c97ead2f9ff84b , and benchmark v1.2.2 . The source inventory contains 23 proposal records: 8 calls from 4 ordinary user tasks, 3 calls representing legitimate direct user goals, and 12 cross-task attack proposals formed by pairing each ordinary task with each direct-injection goal. The adaptation retains upstream task identifiers, paired-task relations, and public tool names. 12 For every record, the proposed explanation truthfully matches the proposed tool and payload. Ordinary and legitimate direct-goal proposals bind the payload to the current task identifier. Cross-task attacks instead bind the payload to the paired injection-task identifier while the authoritative intent certificate remains scoped to the ordinary user task. Untrusted-context evidence is declared and current, so task–proposal inconsistency is the only intended hard contradiction. The same four deterministic configurations process all 23 proposals, producing 92 rows. High-impact banking effects retain a review disposition even when legitimate. 

B. Results and Boundary                                    

> Configuration Profile agree Attack deny Attack non-allow Benign path Direct path FRR
> Free-form justification 0.4783 0.0000 1.0000 1.0000 1.0000 0.0000 Structured schema only 0.4783 0.0000 1.0000 1.0000 1.0000 0.0000 Payload-bound explanation 0.4783 0.0000 1.0000 1.0000 1.0000 0.0000 Full EBTE 1.0000 1.0000 1.0000 1.0000 1.0000 1.0000
> TABLE VII PINNED AGENT DOJO SEMANTIC ADAPTATION OVER 23 PROPOSALS PER CONFIGURATION . “D IRECT PATH ”DENOTES LEGITIMATE DIRECT USER GOALS ,NOT INJECTED GOALS EMBEDDED IN ANOTHER TASK .

All configurations keep every attack proposal non-allow because the public banking effect tools in this subset are high risk and therefore review-gated. Full EBTE changes the diagnostic disposition of the 12/12 task–proposal contradictions from review to deny; the immediate non-allow rate remains 12/12 under every ablation. All configurations preserve the expected disposition of 8/8 benign and 3/3 legitimate direct-goal proposals. Full EBTE also produces structurally complete packets for 23/23 proposals. This result tests transfer of one contract predicate to a public benchmark task structure. The adapter uses a self-contained 23-record snapshot derived from a verified minimized source artifact and deterministic public tool semantics; both the snapshot and its upstream source hash are recorded. Its unit of analysis is the task–proposal binding rather than an end-to-end AgentDojo trajectory. XIII. D ISCUSSION 

A. Evidence Across Evaluation Tiers 

The authored suite measures whether the implementation realizes the named profile predicates. The draft-only integration places the verifier before a reference draft boundary and binds its outcome into the created object. The frozen hosted record characterizes contract generation under one constrained historical interface, while the zero-call layer routes the preserved minimized claims under the current pipeline. The external semantic adaptation adds the diagnostic distinction between task-bound denial and generic high-risk review. 

B. Attributable Fail-Closed Routing 

These tiers jointly demonstrate an attributable fail-closed interface: a proposal that cannot satisfy the current profile receives a named non-allow disposition and a bounded packet. Its coverage depends on the integrity and completeness of authoritative facts, predicates, and enforcement. Queue overload, automation bias, and approval paths that omit revalidation remain operational risks. 

C. Design Trade-offs 

More authoritative predicates improve diagnostic specificity but increase integration cost, fact freshness requirements, and the probability of review when state is unavailable. Bounded summaries and digests reduce ordinary disclosure but make later semantic investigation dependent on separately authorized source retention. Detailed reason codes improve repairability and audit attribution but can become an adaptive oracle; model-facing feedback should therefore be coarser than privileged audit evidence. Finally, the hosted transition counts show that automatic repair is not monotonically beneficial. Deployments need budgets, stopping rules, and queue controls rather than an unbounded repair loop. 13 D. Implications for Agent-System Architecture 

EBTE is most useful where an application already owns authoritative intent, policy, route, and effect facts. It does not create those facts and should not be placed inside the same untrusted planner that generated the proposal. The verifier belongs at a reference-monitor boundary, while source retrieval, human review, and effect execution remain separately governed. This placement makes the explanation useful even when it is not faithful introspection: each enforceable statement becomes a proposition that the application can independently accept, reject, or mark unresolved. XIV. S ECURITY AND PRIVACY ANALYSIS 

A. Plausible False Explanations 

An attacker may produce a fluent explanation that matches the payload superficially. EBTE ignores fluency as an authorization signal. Typed claims must agree with current server facts. If the attacker controls both payload and explanation, upstream intent, policy, context, route, and effect evidence remain independent comparison points. 

B. Explanation Generator and Planner Collusion 

Using the same model for planning and explanation creates correlated failure. EBTE does not assume independence between them. Both outputs are untrusted. A separate model verifier may improve empirical detection but is not part of the core guarantee unless its outputs are themselves bounded by deterministic rules. 

C. Stale Evidence 

Explanation references are scoped to current intent, policy, route, context, and preflight versions. A digest match to an expired or superseded record is insufficient. The effect path must revalidate current state before execution. This is essential because a previously correct explanation can become unsafe after policy or context changes. 

D. Information Leakage 

Explanations can become a secondary exfiltration channel. Most enforceable profile fields are categorical labels, bounded identifiers, or digests, and an explicit raw-content field is rejected. The bounded intentSummary remains free text, however, and the fixed-marker test does not detect novel encoding. Encoded-disclosure coverage therefore depends on semantic content scanning, retention controls, output budgets, and access-separated audit export. 

E. Human Automation Bias 

A verified packet may increase operator confidence even when upstream facts are wrong. Human-AI studies show that interface design can affect overreliance, and security warnings can lose effectiveness when interventions are poorly targeted [28], [29]. EBTE labels what was verified and what remains uncertain. It must not present mechanism properties as semantic correctness. High-risk review interfaces should show effect bounds and failed predicates prominently, support source access through separately authorized channels, and measure unsafe approval rather than trust alone. XV. R ELATED WORK 

Explainable AI, reasoning traces, and human decision support. LIME and broader XAI research ask how explanations help people interpret model outputs [5], [6]. Interpretability may be underspecified, misunderstood, or insufficient to improve decisions [7]–[9]. ReAct interleaves reasoning and acting [4], while chain-of-thought studies show that stated reasoning can be weakly coupled to the factors that caused an output [1]–[3]. Human-AI guidelines and cognitive-forcing work further motivate measuring overreliance [28], [30]. EBTE instead targets a server-checkable statement about an external effect. 

Explainable access control and authorization provenance. Explainable security and explainable access-control research studies how policy decisions can be justified to users and administrators [31], [32]. SmartAuth, AWare, decision-provenance, and access-provenance systems connect user intent, contextual evidence, or policy history to permission decisions [33]–[36]. EBTE shares the reference-monitor principle and the need for attributable policy evidence, but its input is different: an untrusted agent supplies a proposed tool, payload, and bounded action claim after model planning. The gateway must compare that claim across intent, route, payload, policy, risk, and context views without allowing the explanation to create authority. 

Agent security, specifications, and attribution. AgentDojo, InjecAgent, ToolHijacker, and MCPTox evaluate attacks on agent context and tool use [14]–[17]. StruQ protects the instruction–data boundary [18]; AttriGuard attributes tool invocations to causal context [19]. CaMeL separates control and data flows for agent execution, Fides 14 applies information-flow control, and Tracked Capabilities associates authority with tracked runtime values [37]– [39]. AgentSpec and work on verifiably safe agent behavior pursue explicit constraints and checkable execution properties [40], [41]. EBTE is complementary to prompt isolation, information-flow enforcement, causal attribution, capability tracking, and action specifications: it consumes server facts from those layers and returns a non-widening action disposition plus a bounded evidence packet. 

Auditability and standards. Auditable Agents frames recoverability, policy checkability, responsibility attribution, and evidence integrity as system properties [24]; Agent Audit analyzes code and deployment artifacts before execution [25]. Least privilege and ABAC ground EBTE’s non-widening composition [10], [11]. MCP specifies tool and transport-authorization semantics [20], [21], while NIST and OWASP motivate TEVV, least privilege, and human oversight [22], [23]. EBTE contributes an application-layer, runtime action-claim object above transport authorization; it does not replace policy provenance, transport identity, or effect controls.                  

> Approach family Primary object Authoritative cross-check Tool/effect/freshness binding Relation to authority
> XAI and rationale faithfulness Model explanation or reasoning trace Usually model/output evidence Not the primary target Interpretive; not an authorization rule Explainable access control Policy decision and justification Policy state and attributes Policy/resource centered Explains an existing access decision Intent/provenance-aware permission systems User intent, context, or provenance OS/application facts Domain-specific and often pre-action Narrows or attributes permission use Agent prompt/tool defenses Prompt structure, tool behavior, or causal context Defense-specific evidence Often attack- or prompt-centered Prevents or attributes selected failures Agent specifications and safety monitors Explicit behavioral/action constraints Monitor or formal specification Strong when modeled Constrains execution under the specification EBTE Untrusted typed action claim Intent, registry, route, payload, policy, risk, and context Cross-view, versioned, pre-effect Joins with existing controls; never widens them

TABLE VIII PRIMARY OBJECTS , AUTHORITATIVE CROSS -CHECKS , EFFECT BINDING , AND AUTHORITY SEMANTICS ACROSS EBTE AND ADJACENT RESEARCH .

XVI. L IMITATIONS AND THREATS TO VALIDITY 

The deterministic suite is small, authored, and partially generated from 8 base tasks. Expected outcomes are defined by the same profile implemented by the evaluator, so profile-disposition agreement measures conformance within that profile. The predicate ablations are controlled mechanism variants. The AgentDojo adaptation uses a minimized proposal inventory without environment transitions, arguments, model interaction, or upstream scoring. All 12 adapted attacks are already non-allow under the high-risk ablations, so EBTE’s observed increment is diagnostic denial rather than additional immediate blocking. The draft-only wrapper uses a single in-memory clean pinned reference runtime and forced drafts; effect execution, action-time revalidation, concurrency, durability, throughput, and production latency remain unevaluated. The historical hosted pilot uses 4 model families, 12 fact-complete synthetic tasks per model, 2 dependent seeded repeats, and a highly constrained prompt that was iteratively debugged before the reported protocol was frozen. Availability filtering was not preregistered, and one model family accounts for all 21 provider failures. The historical files have no run fingerprint/configuration or raw responses; digest-minimized fields prevent independent inspection of exact wording and make the current offline revalidation necessarily post hoc. The study includes no naturalistic explanations, adaptive attacks, production inference workloads, or human participants. Structural-packet conformance means that the 136 authored full-profile outcomes contain the registered identity, decision, reason, predicate, per-operand availability, normalized-operand, bounded diagnostic, and fixed-order digest fields and exclude the checked raw fields or marker. FRR reports whether the claim’s required digests resolve exactly to current fixture facts. Human comprehension, retained-source resolution, pre-parse byte-limit wiring, cross-domain identity binding, and semantic detection of novel sensitive content remain outside these structural checks. The design invariants assume correct identity binding, intent, route, tool metadata, policy, risk labels, digest binding, current-state lookup, action-time recomputation, and complete mediation. Misconfigured facts, compromised gateways, malicious authorized tool code, review abuse, out-of-band actions, and incorrect provenance remain residual risks. XVII. R EPRODUCIBILITY AND ETHICS 

The internal evaluation artifact includes the task catalog, reusable verifier, deterministic evaluator, runtime wrapper, NVIDIA-only model runner, cross-model aggregator, pinned AgentDojo semantic adapter, authoritative JSON results, 15 minimized task-level JSONL traces, derived Markdown reports, a Draft 2020–12 JSON Schema, a machine-readable conformance profile, and a hash-bound cross-artifact verifier. The conformance runner checks all 136 expected full-profile decisions, all 232 registered metamorphic predicates, aligned schema validity, malformed-schema rejection, and registration of every emitted reason code. The external adapter additionally asserts the upstream release, clean revision, benchmark version, suite, minimized-record boundary, and exact 23-proposal inventory before producing 92 rows. Deterministic conformance, runtime mediation, semantic adaptation, and current hosted-record revalidation run offline; the frozen historical generation record used NVIDIA’s hosted API. The reported records contain synthetic fixtures, public benchmark identifiers and tool names, categorical relations, digests, outcome categories, minimized parsed fields, and reason names. Original-harness records marked coverage.complete=false are incomplete. 

A. Data and Code Availability 

Source code and task-level evaluation data are maintained as an internal research artifact and are not distributed with this manuscript. 

B. Ethics 

The reported evaluation uses synthetic inputs and public benchmark semantics, involves no human participants, and terminates reference-runtime requests as non-executing drafts. 

C. Funding and Competing Interests 

Accentrust provided research stewardship and computing resources. Both authors are affiliated with Accentrust; that relationship is disclosed as a potential competing interest because EBTE composes with public OpenPort abstractions stewarded by the same organization. 

D. Author Contributions 

Genliang Zhu contributed conceptualization, methodology, software, investigation, artifact curation, and the initial manuscript. Chu Wang contributed conceptualization, validation, formal and empirical review, research supervision, and manuscript revision. Both authors approved the manuscript. XVIII. C ONCLUSION 

EBTE changes the role of an agent explanation from persuasive prose to an untrusted action claim. Its value is not to reveal why a model reasoned as it did, but to let a reference monitor compare declared tool, effect, provenance, and evidence claims with authoritative application facts before authority is exercised. Under explicit trust and mediation assumptions, the composed decision cannot be less restrictive than baseline authorization or effect control, and review cannot execute without a fresh action-time decision. The evaluation establishes conformance on the authored profile, draft-bound mediation in the reference integration, heterogeneous hosted-model generation and repair behavior, and a diagnostic deny distinction on the AgentDojo-derived task structure. EBTE provides a composable governance and structural-audit interface whose enforceable action claims can be checked independently at the tool-effect boundary. Future work will evaluate broader attack distributions, reviewer interaction, and production operating conditions. APPENDIX AREFERENCE EXPLANATION SCHEMA                  

> {"schemaVersion": "ebte-0.1", "intentClasses": ["export"], "intentSummary": "Export the bounded requested collection.", "selectedTool": "records.export", "toolReasonCode": "tool.effect_matches_intent", "policyBasis": {"requiredScopes": ["record.read", "record.export"], "policyRuleIds": ["policy.export.review"], "decision": "review" }, "expectedEffect": {"operation": "export", "resourceType": "record",

16 "resourceIds": ["collection_a"], "maxRecords": 50, "destination": "user_download" }, "riskTier": "high", "uncertainty": {"level": "low", "reasonCodes": []}, "untrustedContextDependencies": [], "evidenceRefs": [{"type": "intent_certificate", "digest": "sha256 :0000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000"}, {"type": "policy_snapshot", "digest": "sha256 :1111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111"}, {"type": "payload", "digest": "sha256 :2222222222222222222222222222222222222222222222222222222222222222"} ]}

Listing 1. Sanitized EBTE explanation example. Digests and identifiers are synthetic. 

APPENDIX BDECISION AND REASON -C ODE PROFILE 

Reason category Default Meaning 

tool mismatch Deny Declared and proposed tool identities differ. route outside authorized set Deny Proposed or declared tool is absent from the server-owned current candidate set. intent class mismatch Deny Declared intent classes do not exactly match the current certificate. intent class overbreadth Deny At least one declared class is outside the current certificate. operation outside intent Deny The payload operation is absent from the current intent’s operation set. resource id mismatch Deny Explanation and payload target different resources or an overbroad resource set. resource type mismatch Deny Declared and proposed resource types differ. operation mismatch Deny Declared and proposed operations differ. record bound mismatch Deny Record bound fails to cover payload, exceeds intent, or is substantive but inapplicable. amount bound mismatch Deny Amount bound fails to cover payload, exceeds intent, or is substantive but inapplicable. field bound mismatch Deny Field set fails to cover payload, exceeds intent, or is substantive but inapplicable. destination mismatch Deny Destination differs from payload or is substantive but inapplicable. payload outside intent Deny Payload exceeds current certified intent even when its explanation matches. TABLE IX REFERENCE HARD -DENIAL REASONS FOR ROUTE , INTENT , RESOURCE , OPERATION , AND PAYLOAD CONFINEMENT .

17 Reason category Default Meaning 

policy rule mismatch Deny Declared rule identifiers differ from the current applicable rule set. authoritative policy denial Deny Current server policy denies the action even when the claim acknowledges denial. policy decision contradiction Deny Current policy denies while the explanation claims a less restrictive decision. policy self denial Deny The explanation declares denial; a claim cannot use that declaration to obtain a weaker route. stale evidence Deny A required evidence digest differs from current server state. untrusted dependency omitted Deny Material untrusted context lacks categorical provenance evidence. context dependency mismatch Deny The normalized dependency-pair set contains a substantive pair outside the current authoritative context state. raw context disclosure Deny Explanation attempts to persist raw untrusted content. TABLE X REFERENCE HARD -DENIAL REASONS FOR POLICY , EVIDENCE FRESHNESS , PROVENANCE , AND DISCLOSURE .

Reason category Default Meaning 

schema incomplete Review Required typed evidence is missing or unsupported. risk understatement Review Declared risk is below server-owned risk. policy basis missing Review Required scope or policy evidence is incomplete. policy decision mismatch Review Declared allow/review disposition differs from current policy without overriding a denial. authoritative policy review Review Current server policy requires review even when the declared disposition matches. effect bound claim incomplete Review An applicable quantitative bound is absent from the typed effect claim. destination claim incomplete Review An applicable external destination is absent from the typed effect claim. field claim incomplete Review An applicable field set is absent from the typed effect claim. duplicate evidence type Review Required evidence types are not one-to-one and complete. evidence incomplete Review The claim lacks an exact one-per-type set of format-valid required references. high uncertainty Review Agent declares unresolved ambiguity. high risk review Review Current server-owned tool risk requires independent review. TABLE XI REFERENCE REVIEW -ESCALATION REASONS . D EPLOYMENTS MAY USE DIFFERENT EXTERNAL CODES WHILE PRESERVING SEMANTICS .

Reason category Default Unavailable authoritative operand 

authoritative evidence unavailable Review Exact current intent/policy/payload digest set. authoritative context unavailable Review Trusted/untrusted flag or required current context pair. authoritative tool unavailable Review Canonical tool identity. authoritative route unavailable Review Current authorized-route set. authoritative intent classes unavailable Review Current intent-class set. authoritative intent operations unavailable Review Certified operation set. authoritative intent resource unavailable Review Certified resource type or target set. authoritative intent effect unavailable Review Applicable intent record, amount, or field bounds. authoritative intent destination unavailable Review Certified destination state. authoritative payload operation unavailable Review Actual payload operation. authoritative payload resource unavailable Review Actual payload resource or target. authoritative payload effect unavailable Review Applicable payload record, amount, or field values. authoritative payload destination unavailable Review Actual payload destination state. authoritative policy basis unavailable Review Canonical scope or rule set. authoritative policy decision unavailable Review Current allow/review/deny policy disposition. authoritative risk unavailable Review Canonical low/medium/high tool risk. 

TABLE XII STABLE REVIEW REASONS FOR UNAVAILABLE AUTHORITATIVE FACTS . E ACH MARKS ONLY ITS DEPENDENT PACKET PREDICATE OR PREDICATES UNKNOWN ; A KNOWN HARD RESULT ON ANOTHER AVAILABLE OPERAND STILL DOMINATES .

18 APPENDIX CSCENARIO INVENTORY 

Variant Expected outcome Construct tested 

Aligned Allow or high-risk review Benign compatibility and risk routing. Malformed or unknown schema Review Strict parse and bounded-schema failure. Tool mismatch Deny Tool identity binding. Unauthorized route Deny Proposed tool membership in the current server-owned candidate set. Intent-class overreach Deny Declared class confinement to the current intent certificate. Operation outside intent Deny Payload operation binding to the certified effect class. Resource mismatch Deny Target-resource binding. Effect mismatch Deny Operation or quantitative effect binding. Risk understatement / high uncertainty Review Soft escalation without attack attribution. Missing policy basis Review Independent policy-evidence requirement. Fabricated policy rule Deny Current policy-rule identifier binding. Undeclared context Deny Provenance completeness. Stale context digest Deny Current context-source and digest binding. Raw context leak Deny Minimal-disclosure enforcement. Payload outside intent Deny Authoritative intent-to-payload binding. Resource overbreadth Deny Exact resource-set confinement. Stale policy evidence Deny Current evidence-digest binding. Invalid risk enumeration Review Bounded schema and fail-safe parsing. Duplicate evidence type Review Evidence-type uniqueness and completeness. 

> TABLE XIII REGISTERED SCENARIO FAMILIES IN THE STRICT REFERENCE PROFILE .

APPENDIX DREFERENCE VERIFICATION ALGORITHM 

function decide(serializedExplanation, action, principal): require utf8ByteLength(serializedExplanation) <= 1048576 explanation = parseJSON(serializedExplanation) parsed = validateStrictBoundedSchema(explanation) schemaRoute = classifySchemaDisposition(parsed) serverFacts = resolveCurrentScopedFacts( principal, action, ["intent", "tool", "route", "policy", "context"] )availability = validateAuthoritativeFields( action, serverFacts, perPredicateDependencies )facts = normalizeAvailableServerFacts(action, serverFacts) partial = normalizeParseableClaimSubfields( explanation, claimFieldNamesOnly=true, sliceBeforeFilterAndDeduplicate=profile.canonicalCaps )hard = compareSafelyResolvableHardDimensions( partial, facts, availability, ["intent_classes", "operation_match", "operation_inside_intent", "tool", "authorized_route", "payload_inside_intent", "resource", "effect_bounds", "destination", "policy_rule", "policy_decision", "context_digest", "evidence_freshness", "raw_context_disclosure" ]) // Each applicable effect bound must cover payload and stay within intent. // Freshness compares every parseable required ref independently of 

19 // one-to-one completeness. Unavailable server operands are never matches. if schemaRoute.isDeny: ebte = DENY( schemaRoute.reasonCodes + hard.reasonCodes + availability.reviewReasonCodes, structuralPacket( schemaRoute, hard, availability, parsed.claimDiagnostics ))else if not parsed.schemaValid: if hard.notEmpty: ebte = DENY( hard.reasonCodes + schemaRoute.reasonCodes + availability.reviewReasonCodes, structuralPacket( hard, schemaRoute, availability, parsed.claimDiagnostics ))else: ebte = REVIEW( schemaRoute.reasonCodes + availability.reviewReasonCodes, structuralPacket( schemaRoute, availability, parsed.claimDiagnostics ))else: claims = normalizeExplanation(parsed) soft = compareSoftDimensions(claims, facts, ["risk", "policy_basis", "policy_decision", "effect_bound_claim_completeness", "destination_claim_completeness", "field_claim_completeness", "evidence_completeness" ]) soft.addAll( schemaRoute.reviewReasonCodes + availability.reviewReasonCodes )tightening = oneWayTightening([ claims.uncertainty ]) advisory = recordWithoutAuthority([ claims.instructionInfluence, claims.toolReasonCode ]) if facts.tool.highRisk: soft.add("high_risk_review") if hard.notEmpty: ebte = DENY( hard.reasonCodes + soft.reasonCodes + tightening.reasonCodes, structuralPacket(hard, soft, tightening, advisory) )else if soft.notEmpty or tightening.requiresReview: ebte = REVIEW( soft.reasonCodes + tightening.reasonCodes, structuralPacket(soft, tightening, advisory) )else: ebte = ALLOW( [], structuralPacket("all_match", advisory) )final = mostRestrictive( serverFacts.baselineDecision, 

20 ebte, serverFacts.effectDecision )return final // REVIEW can create a draft, never execute.  

> Listing 2. Implementation-neutral EBTE decision procedure.

The pseudocode separates hard, soft, one-way-tightening, and audit-only advisory inputs. In profile v0.1, high declared uncertainty can tighten an otherwise matching result to review; instructionInfluence and 

toolReasonCode are recorded but do not change the disposition. They cannot justify allow. Implementations must resolve current server facts before normalization, validate availability at field granularity, and must not reuse model-supplied policy, risk, route, or provenance as authoritative values. The exported reference verifier accepts an already parsed object, so its caller must enforce the registered 1 MiB UTF-8 limit before parsing; JSON Schema 

maxItems is not a transport-memory bound. Post-parse validation uses bounded array prefixes, a 128-error cap with a stable truncation diagnostic, and Unicode code-point length semantics. A malformed authoritative field makes its dependent predicate unknown without suppressing an independently resolvable hard result. Profile v0.1 evidence references contain only intent, policy, and payload digests; route is resolved as a server fact, and context is compared as a deduplicated source-category/digest pair set. Any later approval invokes the procedure again with current facts before effect execution. APPENDIX EEXPERIMENTAL UNITS AND DENOMINATORS 

TABLE XIV: Realized experimental units and their descriptive scope. 

Artifact Unit Realized denominator Permitted interpretation 

Deterministic contract Task–configuration row 136 tasks/configuration; 544 total Complete summary of authored profile fixtures. Hard fixture Task 96 per configuration Conformance on registered hard mutations. Soft fixture Task 32 per configuration Conformance on registered review mutations. Aligned path Task 8 per configuration Compatibility with expected fixture routing. Metamorphic suite Predicate instance 232 total Regression evidence for named transformations. Structural packet Full-profile outcome 136 packets Conformance of the bounded packet projection on authored outcomes. Authoritative-deny control Family–claim-shape check 8 valid plus 8 malformed A schema-review branch cannot downgrade a current policy denial. Authoritative-review control Family-level policy check 8 total A matching claim cannot downgrade current policy review to allow. Mixed predicate controls Family-level check 8 schema-soft/hard; 8 raw-schema/hard; 8 hard/soft Priority and packet truth on registered compound cases. Mixed-malformed controls Family-level check or pair 8 aligned; 8 known-hard; 8 self-denial; 8 typed-raw; 8 review/deny pairs Partial-safe comparison, non-fabrication, crash freedom, and hard-dominance regression evidence. Evidence-state controls Family-level check 8 stale/incomplete; 8 unavailable-current Independence of freshness, completeness, and current-authority availability. Effect three-way controls Applicable bound or family 4 upper; 4 safe slack; 8 inapplicable Claim covers payload, remains inside intent, and omits inapplicable dimensions. 

21 Artifact Unit Realized denominator Permitted interpretation 

Context-state controls Family or untrusted family 8 exactness; 8 unavailable-current; 3 duplicate-current Exact normalized-pair semantics and current-authority availability. Authoritative-availability controls Family-level check or pair 8 unavailable-only; 8 unavailable plus known-hard; 8 empty-object pairs; 8 payload; 5 intent; 8 present optional; 4 resource operands; 8 numeric domain; 4 taxonomy Affected predicates become unknown without masking independent hard results or fabricating inapplicability from an unavailable envelope. Policy/evidence operand controls Family-level check 8 self-denial; 8 split scope/rule; 8 empty/empty scopes; 8 empty/nonempty scopes; 8 extra-key/stale Per-operand availability and fixed evidence-type projection. Canonical replay controls Family, pair, or boundary instance 3 scopes; 1 wide fields; 8 authority sets; 8 bounded claims; 1 fields; 3 context; 8 scalars; 3 source Packet operands and semantic comparison share cap-first canonicalization. Packet/validator boundary controls Pair or boundary instance 4 aliases; 2 diagnostics; 2 outcome order; 2 Unicode; 2 bounded validation No alias-domain confusion, packet collisions, order dependence, UTF-16 length drift, or unbounded post-parse validation errors in the named controls. Claim-omission controls Applicable claim component 4 bound; 1 destination; 1 field set Review plus unknown, never a false packet match. Three-way decision join Decision triple 27 total Exhaustive finite check of baseline–EBTE–effect composition. Draft-only wrapper Task–configuration row 68 tasks/configuration; 272 total Local in-process draft composition. Runtime hard path Task 48 per configuration Whether a designated hard case reaches draft. Runtime soft path Task 16 per configuration Whether a designated soft case creates a draft. Runtime aligned path Task 4 per configuration Whether an aligned case creates a draft. Historical model initial generation Attempt 96; 4 models × 12 tasks ×

2 seeds Frozen 2026-07-12 constrained model-interface record. Historical model ordinary repair Attempt 96; paired with initial generation Frozen descriptive paired feedback transitions. Historical model seeded repair Attempt 32; 4 models × 4 defects ×

2 seeds Frozen repair record for named authored explanation defects. Current model-output revalidation Preserved attempt record 224 attempts; 203 responses; 160 saved parsed claims Zero-call post-hoc current-pipeline judgment over minimized historical fields; not a hosted rerun or historical prompt/code reconstruction. AgentDojo semantic adaptation Proposal–configuration row 23 proposals × 4; 92 total Deterministic task–proposal binding on minimized structure. AgentDojo cross-task attack Proposal 12 per configuration Review-to-deny diagnostic refinement; all already non-allow. AgentDojo legitimate paths Proposal 8 benign and 3 direct goals/configuration Compatibility with upstream-derived roles. 

The task-condition row is the primary descriptive unit. Multiple variants derived from the same base family are dependent by construction. Likewise, runtime measurements share the same local machine and in-memory 22 implementation. The paper therefore does not attach independent-sample confidence intervals or significance tests to these rates. APPENDIX FPRIVACY AND EVIDENCE -A BUSE MATRIX 

Abuse case Required handling Residual risk 

Raw untrusted content in explanation Reject or sanitize; store category, digest, and privacy reason only. Encoded or obfuscated content needs additional detection. Customer or tenant identifier Replace with bounded opaque identifier under audit access control. Linkability remains possible for privileged auditors. Credential-like material Reject, alert, and prevent durable propagation. Detection cannot guarantee coverage of novel formats. Private prompt or model trace Exclude from the contract and ordinary audit export. Separately retained debugging systems require their own controls. Fabricated evidence digest Resolve against current scoped records; unknown digest is non-match. Compromised evidence stores remain outside the guarantee. Oversized explanation Enforce per-field and total schema limits before parsing. Resource-exhaustion controls remain deployment-specific. Cross-application reference Scope every evidence lookup to authenticated app, key, actor, and session. Incorrect identity binding defeats isolation. Stale policy or context reference Revalidate current version at action time. Out-of-band effects cannot be recovered by revalidation.   

> TABLE XV PRIVACY AND EVIDENCE -ABUSE REQUIREMENTS . T HE CURRENT ARTIFACT EXERCISES EXPLICIT RAW -CONTEXT FIELDS ,DIGEST SHAPE ,
> EVIDENCE FRESHNESS ,AND EVIDENCE -TYPE UNIQUENESS .

APPENDIX GARTIFACT INVENTORY AND REPRODUCTION 

The authoritative and derived artifacts are separated as follows:  

> •

task_catalog.mjs : synthetic base tasks and mutations;  

> •

explanation_verifier.mjs : reusable decision logic;  

> •

explanation_contract_eval.mjs : deterministic condition runner and metamorphic suite;  

> •

results_explanation_contract.json : authoritative deterministic output;  

> •

profile/ebte-v0.1-schema.json : bounded public JSON Schema;  

> •

profile/ebte-v0.1-profile.json : machine-readable decisions, reasons, privacy boundary, and expected counts;  

> •

conformance_profile_eval.mjs : schema/profile/reference cross-check;  

> •

runtime_explanation_eval.ts : local OpenPort wrapper-path runner;  

> •

results_runtime_explanation.json : authoritative runtime summary and rows;  

> •

model_pilot_tasks.jsonl : synthetic aligned, repairable, and nonrepairable model tasks;  

> •

model_explanation_pilot.mjs : NVIDIA-only generation and repair runner;  

> •

per-model JSON/JSONL outputs: authoritative minimized model results and traces;  

> •

aggregate_model_explanation_eval.mjs : four-model evidence aggregator;  

> •

results_model_explanation_multimodel.json : authoritative cross-model summary;  

> •

agentdojo_semantic_adaptation_eval.mjs : pinned minimized external-task semantic adapter;  

> •

agentdojo_minimized_proposals.json : self-contained 23-record public-structure snapshot;  

> •

results_agentdojo_semantic_adaptation.json : authoritative 92-row adaptation result;  

> •

verify_artifact_manifest.mjs : evidence, privacy, count, table-text, byte-length, and SHA-256 verifier; and  

> •

Markdown result files: derived human-readable tables. The deterministic artifact runs with Node.js and no external services. The runtime wrapper requires an explicit path to a compatible OpenPort reference-runtime checkout and records the Git revision, cleanliness state, and source fingerprint. The manifest verifier rejects changed bytes, mismatched result denominators, unregistered evidence totals, credential-like material, and propagation of the raw negative-fixture marker into generated outputs. 23 APPENDIX HOPERATOR REVIEW EVIDENCE 

A future EBTE review interface should display only decision-relevant evidence: 1) proposed tool, operation, target resources, quantitative bounds, and destination; 2) current intent classes and bounded purpose summary; 3) current policy and route decision identifiers; 4) risk, uncertainty, and context-dependency categories; 5) matched, soft, unknown, and hard predicate results; 6) whether evidence is current, stale, missing, or privacy-sanitized; and 7) the available reviewer actions and their expected effects. The interface must not imply that all-match proves semantic correctness. It should distinguish gateway-verified facts from model-declared summaries and expose raw sources only through separately authorized, logged access. REFERENCES [1] M. Turpin, J. Michael, E. Perez, and S. R. Bowman, “Language models don’t always say what they think: Unfaithful explanations in chain-of-thought prompting,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol. 36. Red Hook, NY, USA: Curran Associates, Inc., 2023, pp. 74 952–74 965. [Online]. Available: https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper files/paper/2023/hash/ed3fea9033a80fea1376299fa7863f4a-Abstract-Conference.html [2] T. Lanham, A. Chen, A. Radhakrishnan, B. Steiner, C. Denison, D. Hernandez, D. Li, E. Durmus, E. Hubinger, J. Kernion, K. Lukoˇ si¯ ut˙ e, K. Nguyen, N. Cheng, N. Joseph, N. Schiefer, O. Rausch, R. Larson, S. McCandlish, S. Kundu, S. Kadavath, S. Yang, T. Henighan, T. Maxwell, T. Telleen-Lawton, T. Hume, Z. Hatfield-Dodds, J. Kaplan, J. Brauner, S. R. Bowman, and E. Perez, “Measuring faithfulness in chain-of-thought reasoning,” 2023, preprint. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.13702 [3] E. Yee, A. Li, C. Tang, Y. H. Jung, R. Paturi, and L. Bergen, “Dissociation of faithful and unfaithful reasoning in LLMs,” 2024, preprint. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.15092 [4] S. Yao, J. Zhao, D. Yu, N. Du, I. Shafran, K. Narasimhan, and Y. Cao, “ReAct: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models,” in 

International Conference on Learning Representations . Kigali, Rwanda: OpenReview.net, 2023. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/forum?id=WE vluYUL-X [5] M. T. Ribeiro, S. Singh, and C. Guestrin, “Why should i trust you?: Explaining the predictions of any classifier,” in Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining . New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2016, pp. 1135–1144. [6] T. Miller, “Explanation in artificial intelligence: Insights from the social sciences,” Artificial Intelligence , vol. 267, pp. 1–38, 2019. [7] Z. C. Lipton, “The mythos of model interpretability,” Queue , vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 31–57, 2018. [8] H. Kaur, H. Nori, S. Jenkins, R. Caruana, H. Wallach, and J. Wortman Vaughan, “Interpreting interpretability: Understanding data scientists’ use of interpretability tools for machine learning,” in Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2020, pp. 1–14. [9] F. Poursabzi-Sangdeh, D. G. Goldstein, J. M. Hofman, J. Wortman Vaughan, and H. Wallach, “Manipulating and measuring model interpretability,” in Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2021, pp. 1–52. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3411764.3445315 [10] J. H. Saltzer and M. D. Schroeder, “The protection of information in computer systems,” Proceedings of the IEEE , vol. 63, no. 9, pp. 1278–1308, 1975. [11] V. C. Hu, D. Ferraiolo, R. Kuhn, A. Schnitzer, K. Sandlin, R. Miller, and K. Scarfone, “Guide to attribute based access control (ABAC) definition and considerations,” National Institute of Standards and Technology, NIST Special Publication 800-162, 2014. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-162 [12] K. Greshake, S. Abdelnabi, S. Mishra, C. Endres, T. Holz, and M. Fritz, “Not what you’ve signed up for: Compromising real-world LLM-Integrated applications with indirect prompt injection,” in Proceedings of the 16th ACM Workshop on Artificial Intelligence and Security . New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2023, pp. 79–90. [13] Y. Ruan, H. Dong, A. Wang, S. Pitis, Y. Zhou, J. Ba, Y. Dubois, C. J. Maddison, and T. Hashimoto, “Identifying the risks of LM agents with an LM-Emulated sandbox,” in The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations . Vienna, Austria: OpenReview.net, 2024. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/forum?id=GEcwtMk1uA [14] E. Debenedetti, J. Zhang, M. Balunovic, L. Beurer-Kellner, M. Fischer, and F. Tram` er, “AgentDojo: A dynamic environment to evaluate prompt injection attacks and defenses for LLM agents,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 37 . Red Hook, NY, USA: Curran Associates, Inc., 2024, pp. 82 895–82 920. [Online]. Available: https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper files/paper/2024/hash/ 97091a5177d8dc64b1da8bf3e1f6fb54-Abstract-Datasets and Benchmarks Track.html [15] Q. Zhan, Z. Liang, Z. Ying, and D. Kang, “Injecagent: Benchmarking indirect prompt injections in tool-integrated large language model agents,” in Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2024 . Bangkok, Thailand: Association for Computational Linguistics, 2024, pp. 10 471–10 506. [Online]. Available: https://aclanthology.org/2024.findings-acl.624/ [16] J. Shi, Z. Yuan, G. Tie, P. Zhou, N. Z. Gong, and L. Sun, “Prompt injection attack to tool selection in LLM agents,” in Network and Distributed System Security Symposium (NDSS 2026) . San Diego, CA, USA: Internet Society, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://www.ndss-symposium.org/ndss-paper/prompt-injection-attack-to-tool-selection-in-llm-agents/ [17] Z. Wang, Y. Gao, Y. Wang, S. Liu, H. Sun, H. Cheng, G. Shi, H. Du, and X. Li, “MCPTox: A benchmark for tool poisoning on real-world MCP servers,” Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , vol. 40, no. 42, pp. 35 811–35 819, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://ojs.aaai.org/index.php/AAAI/article/view/40895 [18] S. Chen, J. Piet, C. Sitawarin, and D. Wagner, “StruQ: Defending against prompt injection with structured queries,” in 34th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 25) . Seattle, WA: USENIX Association, 2025, pp. 2383–2400. [Online]. Available: https://www.usenix.org/conference/usenixsecurity25/presentation/chen-sizhe 

24 [19] Y. He, H. Zhu, Y. Li, S. Shao, H. Yao, Z. Liu, and Z. Qin, “AttriGuard: Defeating indirect prompt injection in LLM agents via causal attribution of tool invocations,” in 35th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 26) . Baltimore, MD: USENIX Association, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://www.usenix.org/conference/usenixsecurity26/presentation/he-yu [20] Model Context Protocol, “Tools – model context protocol specification, 2025-11-25,” https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/2025-11-25/server/tools, 2025, version 2025-11-25; accessed 2026-07-24. [21] ——, “Authorization – model context protocol specification, 2025-11-25,” https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/2025-11-25/basic/authorization, 2025, version 2025-11-25; accessed 2026-07-24. [22] National Institute of Standards and Technology, “Artificial intelligence risk management framework: Generative artificial intelligence profile,” National Institute of Standards and Technology, NIST AI 600-1, 2024. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.AI.600-1 [23] OWASP Foundation, “LLM01:2025 prompt injection,” https://genai.owasp.org/llmrisk/llm01-prompt-injection/, 2025, accessed 2026-07-12. [24] Y. Nian, A. Yuan, H. Zhang, J. Li, and Y. Zhao, “Auditable agents,” 2026, preprint. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2604.05485 [25] H. Zhang, Y. Nian, and Y. Zhao, “Agent audit: A security analysis system for LLM agent applications,” 2026, preprint. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.22853 [26] A. Rundgren, B. Jordan, and S. Erdtman, “JSON canonicalization scheme (JCS),” RFC 8785, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8785.html [27] G. Zhu and C. Wang, “Intent-governed tool authorization for AI agents,” 2026, preprint. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2606.22916 [28] Z. Buc ¸inca, M. B. Malaya, and K. Z. Gajos, “To trust or to think: Cognitive forcing functions can reduce overreliance on AI in AI-Assisted decision-making,” in Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2021, pp. 1–21. [29] J. Sunshine, S. Egelman, H. Almuhimedi, N. Atri, and L. F. Cranor, “Crying wolf: An empirical study of SSL warning effectiveness,” in 

18th USENIX Security Symposium . Montreal, Quebec: USENIX Association, 2009, pp. 399–416. [Online]. Available: https://www.usenix.org/conference/18th-usenix-security-symposium/crying-wolf-empirical-study-ssl-warning-effectiveness [30] S. Amershi, D. Weld, M. Vorvoreanu, A. Fourney, B. Nushi, P. Collisson, J. Suh, S. Iqbal, P. N. Bennett, K. Inkpen, J. Teevan, R. Kikin-Gil, and E. Horvitz, “Guidelines for Human-AI interaction,” in Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2019, pp. 1–13. [31] L. Vigan` o and D. Magazzeni, “Explainable security,” in 2020 IEEE European Symposium on Security and Privacy Workshops (EuroS&PW) .Genoa, Italy: IEEE, 2020, pp. 293–300. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/EuroSPW51379.2020.00045 [32] G. Hasel Mehri, C. Morisset, and N. Zannone, “Towards explainable access control [BlueSky Paper],” in Proceedings of the 30th ACM Symposium on Access Control Models and Technologies . New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2025, pp. 117–126. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3734436.3734439 [33] Y. Tian, N. Zhang, Y.-H. Lin, X. Wang, B. Ur, X. Guo, and P. Tague, “SmartAuth: User-centered authorization for the internet of things,” in 26th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 17) . Vancouver, BC: USENIX Association, 2017, pp. 361–378. [Online]. Available: https://www.usenix.org/conference/usenixsecurity17/technical-sessions/presentation/tian [34] G. Petracca, A.-A. Reineh, Y. Sun, J. Grossklags, and T. Jaeger, “AWare: Preventing abuse of privacy-sensitive sensors via operation bindings,” in 26th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 17) . Vancouver, BC: USENIX Association, 2017, pp. 379–396. [Online]. Available: https://www.usenix.org/conference/usenixsecurity17/technical-sessions/presentation/petracca [35] J. Singh, J. Cobbe, and C. Norval, “Decision provenance: Harnessing data flow for accountable systems,” IEEE Access , vol. 7, pp. 6562–6574, 2019. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2887201 [36] F. Capobianco, C. Skalka, and T. Jaeger, “ACCESSPROV: Tracking the provenance of access control decisions,” in 9th USENIX Workshop on the Theory and Practice of Provenance (TaPP 2017) . Seattle, WA: USENIX Association, 2017. [Online]. Available: https://www.usenix.org/conference/tapp17/workshop-program/presentation/capobianco [37] E. Debenedetti, I. Shumailov, T. Fan, J. Hayes, N. Carlini, D. Fabian, C. Kern, C. Shi, A. Terzis, and F. Tram` er, “Defeating prompt injections by design,” in IEEE Conference on Secure and Trustworthy Machine Learning (SaTML) . Munich, Germany: IEEE, 2026, also available as arXiv:2503.18813. [Online]. Available: https://satml.org/2026/program/ [38] M. Costa, B. K¨ opf, A. Kolluri, A. Paverd, M. Russinovich, A. Salem, S. Tople, L. Wutschitz, and S. Zanella-B´ eguelin, “Securing AI agents with information-flow control,” 2025, preprint. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.23643 [39] M. Odersky, Y. Zhao, Y. Xu, O. Braˇ cevac, and C. N. Pham, “Securing agents with tracked capabilities,” in Proceedings of the ACM Conference on AI and Agentic Systems . New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2026, pp. 812–838. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3786335.3813127 [40] H. Wang, C. M. Poskitt, and J. Sun, “AgentSpec: Customizable runtime enforcement for safe and reliable LLM agents,” in 2026 IEEE/ACM 48th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE) . New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2026, 12 pages. [Online]. Available: https://cposkitt.github.io/files/publications/agentspec llm enforcement icse26.pdf [41] A. Doshi, Y. Hong, C. Xu, E. Kang, A. Kapravelos, and C. K¨ astner, “Towards verifiably safe tool use for LLM agents,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/ACM 48th International Conference on Software Engineering: New Ideas and Emerging Results (ICSE-NIER) . New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2026, pp. 201–205. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3786582.3786839 

25